n 'looked at me with subservience (niece
i s), since I didn’t understand that I have to study like everyone else. I remember
i "1 .i 'k1vkul. This was when Uncle Michael brought
sixteen
me a sketchbook with colored pencils. It was
news and luxury. Until now, we have written on scraps, and I
used the office books lying around us - narrow,
long. Already in the third grade, Aunt Malka brought me from Moscow
a notebook in an oblique ruler made of thick paper with a shine. I stroked
cover of the notebook and put it under the pillow at night. At night i
remembered about her, got up, pulled her out and impatiently
mornings to output '' on the front page of the neat, long-legged
Gothic German letters.


It was too far to go to school and my hands and feet were freezing.
When we went home, we warmed up in a huge oven opened in
bedroom, and fought for a place closer to her. In spring and autumn, I dressed
Mother's wide woolen jacket and belted tight. My
fluffy reddish hair replaced my hat, o shawls we
did not know at all. Our underwear was a spenzer - flannel
jumpsuit with buttons on the back and across the waist. Their mom
washed and repaired every week, and they moved from
senior to junior.
I also remember that my stomach was always growling and sucking in my stomach -
I was hungry, and we did not go home, but ran. We are our teachers
called by name. My teacher was Mogilevsky Meilakh and his name was
we are his "teacher Meilah". He was blind and clumsy and,
seems eternally hungry and unhappy. We communicated with him not only in
Iikole, but ran to his house, what they were doing there - I don't remember. Was y
"his niece - Liza Charnaya, who was my sincere
friend, and I hung around with them. Her father was a dentist and to them
they came to have their teeth treated from the surrounding villages and paid in kind. Around
. of these products and I was fed. She treasured her friendship with
me, but soon her father died, something I don't remember further about her
nothing, but very often I remember cute, curly, myopic
.vazu and even looked for her in Leningrad - already in the 50s, but alas ...
1; those I was looking for in Leningrad for my second cousins ​​Manya and
Minu (Nehamku), with whom we are in one bedroom, is cramped, bed c
we slept, stealthily gnawed matzo, helped my mother with
and listened to my father's complaints about the parasites in the leg-koge.
Mvnv was already a young lady and went for a walk in the evening, and we went
coooet. We spent time on the front porch in the house
17
and
r
Wolfson, now occupied by customs. Young employees of this
customs looked after Manya and her other friends,
late on the stone benches, where they gnawed sunflower seeds and walked
circle on the highway. The walk began towards the end of the day and lasted until
deep into the night. Was it daily or on holiday days?
I also went for a walk with Nina. We took two or three under the arms
and walked decorously along the sidewalk, as in a demonstration, there, i.e. to the bazaar, and
back - the other side, to a commercial school. Quiet
whispered. We used to go to a pastry shop to eat a cake
(if there was such an opportunity or someone treated). Feeling
pride that we are like everyone else. Dressing up their best, combing their hair like
adults, neat. We came home on tiptoe so as not to
wake up dad and not hear him grumbling. Our rooms were
covered with newspapers and we, waking up, read slogans. poetry, etc. we
knew and sang all the songs - "fried chicken, chicken
boiled, the chicken also wants to live. He was caught, arrested
ordered to put in jail. "
On January 22, 1924, in the evening, Aunt Malka and
told that Lenin had died. We have heard a lot of good things about Lenin,
read in the newspapers and everything that was printed. We also heard about his companions
- Leon Trotsky, Rykov, Bukharin, Zinoviev and others. Then they are still not
beaten by the opposition and were not isolated. We began to wonder who
will replace Lenin, they said - Rykov, and my older brother Abram
said that he wanted to take his place. Dad told him - that's it
learn, try. We already taught in grades 2-3
political economy, wrote essays and dictations - notes about Lenin,
o Soviets, about the October Revolution. I remember how I helped
older brother to teach dialectical materialism - read and
explained to him.
At the age of 12-13 I was already politically active and savvy. Was
such an organization is "Spartak". In my opinion, it existed before
pioneer organization. Each Spartak soldier had a stick-stick
l'IIIIIIIIm'i 101 <shovel handle, well, smoothly cut, long and
h. 141, We write it like a rifle. We marched with her,
   ,  n M itriin uchuii '1 p <HQ pvieipan neesn i. Very proud
.i, 'MMRSCHRI1isch ii uppim (' luIiF n irp • tsiigpi.Ys days, in
I) onrpa'tson. ‚Pgapptl% ii write siipni. 'Tio
I ii
 was
an ordinary skirt with a wide elastic band, the seams were not on the sides, a
front l back. In the middle of the skirt there was a slit to the middle, which
fastened with buttons. When buttons were fastened, around the leg
harem pants turned out. The blouses were white. Later we already
wore red ties, bonfire badges, and
komsomol khaki - breeches trousers, shirts for graduation c
fastener and collar, belted with belts and even t
proudly dressed in a dress, straps over the shoulder. All this form
finishing her cap.
Pioneer - Komsomol member
(middle row, 3rd from the left, Polina Rabinovich - 2nd from the right)
We, Spartacists, united in the Peretsaz club. It was
Jewish club. It was guided by our Jewish teachers and all the work
was conducted in Hebrew. In this club, I made friends with
Lenochki Rabinovich, with Perlechke - my age, and her eldest
Sister Sarrochka. I was not privileged in this club, because
was not of proletarian origin. They took me to this club
perhaps because of Aunt Malka, who was greatly respected. B
the hands of the club were elders, respected by us and very, very
comrades predisposing to the club's cause, like Movshovich, Lisnyansky,
1% ibp They spent days and nights in this club, they were sometimes
i oaidri, but did not show their state. The club revived in the evening.
1! M. пнiи бii report on a political topic. To be active I
nineteen
mastered the work of drawing up a resolution and wrote them each
evening. It consisted of general phrases: "the general meeting, after hearing
Comrade's report states - Lenin's cause has won! Great
October Revolution we pledge ... Signatures ...
Secretary T. Mostkova ".
With what pride I subscribed and mastered the style and
monotonous content and pathos of the new business. Later I became
pioneer Komsomol member. I remember the parade, build and each of us is the eldest
the pioneer leader tied a red calico tie on his chest
icon, world bonfire - 5 sharp fiery bends, - 5 cardinal points.
"In the struggle for the labor cause - be ready!" - and thunder overturned -
"Always ready" !! We sang a lot and the voices were good, sonorous, and y
I had a voice. I even tried solo singing and it worked out well.
This is from work, training, work - everything will grind!
What songs did we sing?
1.Kerzon4 wanted fish, wanted it, and flew to the White Sea, flew!
2.Pilsudski is dead 5, Pilsudski is dead, dead.
Z. We are a young guard of workers and peasants.
4.Our steam locomotive flies forward, at the commune stop.
5.We are all, we will destroy the old world to the ground, and then - we
our, we will build a new world, who was nobody, he will become everything!
b.International.
Our club was Jewish. It was called - named after Pered and
Sholem Aleichemab. Later we were given a 3-floor building for the club.
former commercial school, and the club was already
international, with different circles and a large program.
I was elected chairman of the sanitary commission, and I was very
proud and immediately took up cleaning the windows on the floors. Polina was
member of the board of the club. I actively participated in the work
bindery and learned this business. Our main
the work was still marching, agitation among the workers and peasants
(we went to the neighboring villages and put on performances, recitation from
pyramids). We arranged majors in the forest, made our way through secret
passwords, sang at the fire, circled, danced.
Slu ck
1911-1926
Me and my friend from school Atl Muler are sitting on their terrace
small wooden house and teach. We are preparing for
admission to a technical school, and necessarily a Moscow one. A month ago we
finished the seven-year plan and decided not to waste time and seriously
prepare for a trip to Moscow.
At school we took all subjects in the Hebrew language, and he
was our mother tongue. As a separate subject we studied
Belarusian, but of course we knew Russian and read
Turgenev, choking, all night long, but they well understood that
we will not be able to enter a Moscow educational institution,
if ... we don't work all day.
The windows of the apartment overlooked a wide, cool courtyard, dirty,
without greenery. Every now and then I looked up from the textbook and surreptitiously
looked with her eyes on the opposite side of the yard, where on the same
people were swarming about the veranda. I wanted to see HIM. I knew
that he completed the second year of the Minsk Pedagogical College and
came on vacation to his large, poor and rather
ii disorganized family. The father was a craftsman, he drank, and the mother
I didn’t make ends meet. Children were good and all in due time
studied at our school. He was sharp-eyed, although in his eyes I
never looked. Our love was on the sly. Back in the 5th
class, he gave me ... paints, and I disgraced myself in front of my own.
I put these colors in the pocket of my light print dress.
11 y, and my mother took me with her to the bathhouse, and there in the dressing room these colors
melted and flowed down. It was a shame, but I did not admit - where to
pit 'uti the paints hit,
I remember the notes he gave me. One of them hit
n the teacher's hands and, probably, my eyes betrayed me and I was
i iddpo. I remember that a bad story was told about him, and I
slabs to tear it out of your heart - passed by and did not
reap, but then she was tormented and looked for him with her eyes. He graduated
gmppsgku pa 2 years earlier than me, entered the Minsk Pedagogical College
20
21
and now I have arrived on vacation. The girls told me that he was there
has another and I didn't care, but still ...
Then I lived with my grandfather - my mother's father. Grandma died and he
one left. My mom was saddled with a pretty big family
but there was nowhere to work and nothing to live with. our grandfather was
respected person in the city, honest, calm and entrusted to him
procurement of furs and all agricultural raw materials. He was
in public service, was a union member and received 25
rubles per month. He lived in an apartment, occupied 2 rooms from the hostess,
who prepared dinner for us. It was my duty to support
their rooms are clean, wash for grandfather and yourself, wash
dishes. My grandfather promised to send me to Moscow next year
to learn, which he did honestly.
My two aunts lived in Moscow - Enta Moiseevna, who graduated
Academy them. Krupskaya, and aunt Malka, mother's sister, lived in
Moscow and Pactrons - the mother of Genya Borukhovich and her uncles and aunts. Many and
... nobody.
My grandfather loved me dearly. If I sometimes feasted on
bun, which was intended for him - he pretended that
does not notice. When I sat all night reading Turgenev, he timidly
answered from the next room - "daughter, you will not get enough sleep."
If I walked around late into the night with HIM and, guilty, quietly
knocked on the window, he got up, groaned and pronounced quietly to
the hostess did not hear: "knock louder, I feel better when you are loud
you knock, I immediately rise and open it to you, otherwise I lie,
I listen and I don’t understand whether you knock or not, and whether
a side apartment in the same building. The yard was large, with households.
buildings, a restroom in the depths, also stone and for some reason not
fenced off. The house where we lived and another Jewish family,
was located in the back of the courtyard with windows to the toilet, and we are interested in
was to look into them. The porch of our house, and the canopy, were
planked and skewed. The house was low but spacious. I remember
large kitchen with Russian stove, long kitchen table q
stools, a large dining room also with a long table covered
oilcloth with a hanging kerosene lamp. Along the walls stood an old
lordly furniture - mirror, bookcase and bed, and 2 bedrooms, one
after another, one of which was a girl's. The point is that in
hungry 20 year from Saratov, a cousin's family came to us
my mother's sisters are her husband and 2 girls Masha and China. Their mom
died there of tuberculosis. They settled at us temporarily and
girls, several years older than me, slept with me together in this
bedroom. The girls' father left to get a job. So now
they say, it's more honest to go to Minsk to buy and sell something here
more expensive, i.e. make money. These were the years of banditry. On the opposite
the way, the entire loaded horse train with goods was surrounded
byndites, who tied all the living to a tree, doused
kerosene and set fire. So Isaac, the father of Masha and Nina, died
Guitiik. And the girls stayed with us forever.
For some reason my father called our bedroom "foot-koge." What's this-
n, pz of the Talmud. In another bedroom there were boys' beds,
n '"pppka, where all our clothes were dried, washed in the evening by mom,
I dress them clean in the morning. I also remember the fire in the city center.
long. "In those hard, half-starved years, I and grandfathers passably
fed and, as they say, did not know the need. My mom lived on
Sadovaya street, in the past street of the rich, and after the fire there
only the synagogue and 2 houses on one side remained intact. All
the rest was ashes. I remember a beautiful, tall, stone
the front porch of the master's house. Behind him is a long corridor
beautiful house with large windows to the street. In my memory in this
ii how did the power change, which I do not understand even now,
Opshi Poles, White Guards, Bolsheviks, etc. I remember father
hippoinp in burnt houses, and I ran after him, and he threatened
h,., pd and uiiga. I was probably about 10 years old. I studied in
I went there at the age of 6 to the preparatory class.
I t and Milkakh was a teacher in the first or second grade, and I
and Oozhshsh to her - I could not understand in any way why I was not allowed to go where
the house housed customs and I remember a certain Smirnov - an employee! in ,. I remember myself in a big knitted sweater, my mother's, and I remember that
this customs. We, the children and the youth of the neighborhood, jumped to and fro at night. jumped up. I still remember - I reached the bazaar and
hanging around on this porch and gnawing sunflower seeds. Came back home, and on the way me
This house was probably confiscated, and the Wolfson owners lived in
22
23
arrested, it seems, were Germans or Poles. I remember from early childhood -
psya roll is a curse word in Polish.
I also remember - my mother gave birth and she had a baby. Like now
I remember - I lay down on her and sucked all the pus off her - sucked and spat in
a bowl. I still remember - I woke up at night from my mother crying,
hysterical. I jumped up and went into the hall. Dad, mom and stranger young
the person seems to be Isrol Tsukovich (my cousin). Something
mom complained about dad. I stood near my mother and, as it were, protected her.
More clearly in my memory - my political active
activity. Club them. writer Peretz. Stone two-story
house, below is a binding workshop. Meetings with reports, circles,
staging. There were talented singers, dancing in paper
suits. They put on a fairy tale - how the girl fell asleep and she dreams of flowers,
who sing and dance. And now, as a girl, I am sleeping, and the flowers are still
did not finish their role, and I woke up ahead of time and was
embarrassment. For a long time I could not recover from shame.
I was active in labor affairs and I was elected chairman
sanitary commission. The club included Sarah Rabinovich,
Movshovich (husband of Fani Iosifovna). Polina was very loved, she
byya chairman of the board of the club.
NEP has come. ' My father opened a haberdashery shop and
trading trifle. The need did not go away, but he had to live with him. I AM
was a pioneer and at the meeting wrote resolutions - "Meeting of young
pioneers, having listened to ... states. ..> '. My social position
I was very embarrassed, although they were
you can't do it - you need to rest, pray to God. Were not very
my dad and especially my mom are believers, but in public you have to observe.
The synagogue was next to our house, fenced in
wooden fence. In the 4th courtyard, we always played hide and seek. Men
put on a tales (white blanket), put it on the forehead and fingers
belts and prayed, standing with your back to the wall. I don't know prayers, but
I understand - they thanked and asked. Women took the places of A.
gallery, their heads were covered with kerchiefs. I remember they came occasionally
singers, and then the entire Jewish people poured into the synagogue.
Saturday was a very reasonable holiday, apart from resting it
gave a person a reasonable discharge. We swam on the eve, dressed everything
clean, festive, shoes shone, slept, ate, went to visit,
rested in the afternoon until deep Saturday darkness.
A special holiday was Easter - Passover. Prepared for her
carefully. Y my mom in the attic, packed in drawers, waited
piece set of dishes - Easter. The whole house was transformed. All
the ordinary was shaken out, swept out, pulled out. Everything is old
it was called chametz, unfit for Easter. Washed, scraped, glued,
painted. My responsibilities were after exposing the winter frames
Wash the windows, renew the hanging lamp with colored tissue paper and
Wash floors thoroughly. Mom washed and starch the laundry. Sewed
everyone has something new. Matzo was bought from white flour, and when hungry
whirligig - from black. I remember a dark, hard matzo that was not
bite without soaking, and we baked it at home ourselves - at home, i.e.