Moscow gardening technical school. We already found Timiryazev as a young man there, appointed agronomist of the state farm. We are
Not remembering myself, I am flying to OZET25 - I am going to Birobidzhan. There, in practice. They fed us hearty in the dining room, taught
OZETE, I feel happy - a lot of people are going, r i Mon, riding a horse, we watched the seeds being prepared for sowing.
specialists, and even more so from Moscow, say that there will be 1chpi, Glstein was a kind person, small in stature and even
republic, but so far only a district, immediately draw up documents, give'11igo shy, undetected. We immediately fell in love with him and
some money, invite to a meeting led by! NU11 or. Nude young wife beautiful Galya charmed us all. Us
Smidovich, Kalinin's deputy. Ii the neighbors aired - he left his wife and son and married her,
I'm going to Birobidzhan. My fees were short-lived. His own.ch gn still a girl, the daughter of her mistress in the Crimean state farm, where
money received as a "contract". those. advance payment, I "o piiiiraa" or work as an agronomist.
straightened out in an instant. We were assigned a special store where I
bought myself a purple silk dress with a colorful bow and
something. Three people were traveling from our technical school - Efim Breiter, Rivp
Magidina and me. Yefim managed to marry our fellow practitioner, but the course
younger, and she gathered with him and left before us. I am with Magidina •
kind fat girl, went later, rode in a carriage with young
guys for 10 days, it was cold in the car, hard on a wooden
shelf, but fun.

We arrived in Khabarovsk on February 12, 1931, early in the morning. (`` goyal
bitter frost. Our direction was to Khabarovsk Kri yul '
Transport has not yet gone, and we, with our light load, were
on foot. On the way we were stopped by women and from the fate
helped to rub the cheeks, because they were blazing from the frost - we
managed to freeze. All our clothes, especially our shoes,
corresponded to the Far East February frost

46

in'ilam y Malky, Faivel n Nachman's grandfather. Vitebsk, 1931

47

The department manager, powerful, took over our patronage
a gray-haired man, very handsome, who was once
manager of the landowner in the west, and now he went to build a new
the republic of the Jews in the Far East. We were dressed in cotton suits
- quilted wadded trousers tucked into felt boots and quilted
sweatshirts. The material is plain, dark cotton - to us
it seemed that the suit suits us, and most importantly, it was comfortable and warm.
And so the steward teaches me to saddle a horse, firmly in his hands
close to him. We flung open the heavy, wooden door, entered
the front hall, and in front of us on the straw lay the owner of the house,
killed by a felled tree in the forest. His wife stood on either side and
small children. I did not have to sleep that night.

In the morning I went out into the yard. The frost was 20-25 degrees, but
The sun shone brightly and warmed so that the cold caressed more,
than freezing. Caked and sparkling snow creaked underfoot,
ii it was possible to look in it like in a mirror. It was easy in my soul.
hold the bridle, bridle the horse and quickly jump to sit downIt the resettlement department told me that the horses from Waldheim
on horseback. You feel like the master of the situation, with pride of services at 4 o'clock in the afternoon, and so that you do not miss them. Will be waiting for me
you guide the fast horse wherever you want and you are not afraid of the fast chairman of the collective farm Misha Shkolnik.
ride, no gallop. Already breathtaking from the ride. With pride And now I am going to work as an agronomist in the collective farm "Waldheim",
you go down and give the ends of the bridle to the manager, and in return you replace the urban vegetable-growing farm, which has
you get praise - “You will be an agronomist, you’re not afraid, and n pilu, greenhouses, a small area of ​​newly developed lands under
well done". We stroked the first tractors and warriors with tenderness. The collective farm has been living for 2 years and 2 Chinese
The "Internationale", who arrived at the state farm, sat down next to the midwife, Volodya - old, dry, and Misha - young, slender
tractor driver, and even tried to turn on the speed, or even start "Ivipian, I will be an agronomist, that is, I will lead them, but in fact
tractor. For the latter, it was necessary to have sufficient physical u • itching to learn a craft, business - I will master the richest
the force accumulated by the local residents of these places - the Chinese with their
The days in Pokhrovka flew by quickly. Riva left to start Vegetable Cultivation.
navigating the first steamer to the Amur Region as an agronomist I will work with people, mainly former shtetl and
collective farm. And I took the train back to the west to Tikhonkaya station, in 12ip1ri4k yyi, who came here to live, work, have their own
km. from which there was a new Jewish resettlement stick; x1 Piece of bread, raise children. People have experienced a lot on their
Waldheim 7, where I was sent. We arrived at the station 1c K and were forced to come here to start a new life.
Quiet already at night. We are passengers traveling by a local train!) ProIvykshis to the hard, physical labor of a peasant and
to this station. On the way, which lasted 3-4 hours, allNN1Nh1M 'TM1KSLyIm climatic conditions.
met. Where should I sleep, where should I go? Even takigo
there was no question. Stolov sat down beside me - chief
resettlement department and said - I live y local residents,
forester, there will be a place for you too, and tomorrow you will go to school 1
collective farm "Waldheim".

I remember how we went out on a deserted little stappio,
which, probably, not in vain was called "Quiet". Was tSmpra
frosty February night. I followed Stolov, n m1
came to the high porch, where the crowd was crowded. The windows were prkch
illuminated. Stolov got worried. He lived here without a family yet (oh
still he came from Minsk), but he has already mastered here and the weight