Foreword

Although my name is on the cover, I am not the author of this book.
It consists entirely of the memories of my mother, Tatiana
(Taiba) Izrailevna Mostkova, written in the period 1976 - 1980
biennium, her personal letter to Boris P, where she talks about her biography and
life of my father, Baskin Joseph Moiseevich, and several
oral stories recorded with her words by my father. About meeting c
relatives 40 years later in Mexico and the United States, my mother told in letters
from there.

I also considered it possible after my mother told about my father's life
attach to the book the original of his statement to the Attorney General
USSR, written in December 1939 and documents about it
release from exile, re-examination of the case and rehabilitation. Father
also left memories of his life, some of them were published in
Russia and Israel in Russian, and some are still waiting for their
researchers.

Mom's manuscripts were kept by my brother, on their basis he wrote
the book "The Branch of a Tree" published in Israel is also in Russian.
After my brother's death, I reread my mother's manuscripts again and realized
what is best about yourself, your life and family, about the life of people at that
hard time, only she herself can tell, her living memory, and
I publish her notes, without touching anything but rare grammatical
and stylistic mistakes. I'm glad I was able to publish it in Israel for
Russian and hope that someday my grandchildren or great-grandchildren
can translate it into other languages, I hope that it will
interesting to an Israeli or American reader.
I think that if my mother was still alive, and she published
her memories, she dedicated 6y them to her mother Shifra
Mostkova, and in her face to all Jewish mothers.
I, for my part, dedicate her to the blessed memory of my family,
killed in 1942 in the Braslav geggo.

Remembering childhood
memories are shared by the trait - before the fire and
the second was probably during the years of the revolution, i.e. before
few impressions. Wake up early
Darkness, and a frosted lamp on the wall
decent, quite rich furniture. it
but probably the house in which I am 7-8 years old
Sdiao the bedroom door is half closed, dad is standing
M peeps through the gap. There, in the wide bedroom
+ ‚Foaati, all in white, my mother is lying. She is giving birth. Y ce
U. dirpdia, good-natured Keila (Clara), so me
0У 9МЧJш, and maybe Rose. Which of my brothers is mom
just assume - Mikhail, born in 1917,
it was in 1917 and I was 6 years old.
beaten, kyuuchno. wooden, houses were often, and she,
ir. e 99My d near future. Before me, for 3 years
earlier, T. Styrian brother Abram, and my whole family
created by laob, 1., d 1907 - 1908. Everyone else is mine
remembering aIIa oTMoretsp y, ks to later years. So, I remember
Polish occupation, I 11'ibsJiJip in school - in the first grade, and
remembered that the pen was peg. I obszh lup 'back home and right there
came back. 1 [ohmio, How ssggchpe • chalk ostopdoped patrol and returned
home, and we all went nowhere, sat in our house, in
their own yard - all the neighbors were at the gate, and they were waiting ... for someone
will come and demand something. Everyone added up and kept the money at
yourself to pay off. It was already in another house, on another
to the side of Sadovaya Street, y the owner Wolfson in the yard, in the outhouse,
next to a large cement washroom. In a large main house he lived
ho'zayi n himself, who was soon ousted (moved to 3
Mrmip i 1. 1 1 'nt • ,,. I, n occupied the house by customs. It was all through
1 'junkio pgi, silt ,, n, kpe fire. I remember the whole burnt down street
R1iaLI Mir1111100.i n py y`y1, ruins. In them we played
1111 M1 II, 11iMip0. n1 1 ° i ni go ii, and 011W imm served as a refuge in
nn1 principle, nnn% iiiu II I, I and 1 we lived until 1928 -29.
ozsudp us) 'plzi II' I 111 1 $ I Lip1m, pImi with children About this period
I remember my life more and I want to write from my
impressions of my ancestors, mostly heard.
So, we live in the courtyard of the Wolfson house. Front house
large, 6 - 8 large windows, with a front stone porch.
Next to us is the newly rebuilt synagogue on the corner, fenced
wooden fence, and a small street, also burnt down, with access to
bazaar. Along this street, retreating quite a bit - 20-40 meters,
the quiet river Sluch flows - the place of our childish relaxation. we are here
swam, more than once or twice a day, rinsed linen here, washed dishes,
cleaned the pots and wade, climbed for water lilies and
went on dates at night.

In the back of the courtyard stood an old house, divided into two
half with a common porch and hallway. The door is a slag to us, a
to the right to our neighbors - the elderly. Opened the door, we went into
large kitchen with chipped floor, which was very
unpleasant to wash. In the front corner of the kitchen was a huge
a Russian stove that heated almost the entire house and served mom for
cooking. There was a chicken coop under the stove. Window in
the courtyard was opposite the stove. Right behind the stove was a small
room 10-12m2, nursery or hen party. I and mine lived there
cousins ​​Masha and Nina, whom my mother took in
after the death of their mother in Saratov from tuberculosis. Their dad Bunin
Isaac brought him to his family, he himself wanted to get a job and earn a living.
It so happened that he went to Minsk for the goods, and an expensive train
bandits overtook, robbed, tied to a tree and burned. These ones
the girls stayed with us.

To the left of the entrance was a hall and a small bedroom. All
the atmosphere was already more than poor, but the hall was preserved from
old apartment mirror with beautiful legs and a chest of drawers with
with secret drawers and convertible top. That's all that's left of
past well-being and, according to my mother, all this was collected by my
to parents from the rich house of mother's relatives - Pole, who
probably left - fled to Moscow, Leningrad or even abroad.
Mom didn't know exactly where they had gone. But there were rich people Pole
- by the surname from which my impoverished grandmother descended
Pesya Polyak, who married a poor guy, but very
intelligent and scientist and, as they said then, economic,
I

Z

those. venerable, with confidence, Nahmani Noruhilmai, gave him 11
children, of whom two survived to old age. i iomiiio like my father
I was hiding in the ruins of a conflagration, from whom I don’t know.
Probably from mobilization. He was starving - making his own stomach.
Many were chopping off their fingers. I remember how it was already burning during the revolution
city, our haberdashery shop was burning - property and all
the state of my parents, the bazaar was burning and we children were sitting with a neighbor
y windows and watched the flame and cried that there was still no mother
with dad.

In these distant childhood years, our
Haya's grandmother. They were a small, quiet, very old woman.
I remember her wealth - a small, forged chest, and in it
multicolored balls of thread. She knitted and the thread was always woven
somewhere on the floor, and our Siberian cat, fluffy, kept striving for him
roll away to play enough. This grandmother is a mother
my father Isrol Mostkov. She lived all her life in
a distant village-place somewhere on the border with Poland, near
Unfinished. I don't even remember her voice, she was so powerless
and silent. This woman gave birth and raised, or they themselves
grown up, many children. I knew her youngest son, my father,
who was born in 1880, heard about Taiba's eldest daughter, son
Motle, daughter of Ginde, the youngest son of Eiser, and more. Their house
stood near the bridge and therefore, according to legend, the name went Mostkov.
What did her husband, my grandfather Leiba, I do not know, and there is no one
ask. He was a poor man - I know this for sure, and growing up
the youth left for America.

This was around the end of the last century. The elders left
brothers and with them my 15-year-old future dad. They got into
Mississippi, and were poor, doing petty trade and handicrafts,
a uncles were doing something y the owner. They were pedlers
peddlers, with a sack draped over their shoulders, they carried every
small goods, mainly haberdashery. When we children were growing up and
asked to eat in those hungry 20s, dad told us: “Here in
We did not ask America to eat, but the owner told us - look at
sausage and eat bread, drink cold water and lean against
hot stove - you will have American-style tea. It should be so. " About me
4
neighbors said: “A wonderful girl - she plays all day and
he doesn't even ask for food. "


*****



Mom's manuscript
Thus, my father went through the first school of life.
tempering in America. When he grew up and began to get married, he got bored
in a distant home, or maybe he didn't find a bride for himself, but he already
was over 25 years old when he returned to Russia and became my fiancé, already
a little outdated, 27-year-old mother-to-be. But about mom later.
My dad was by nature a kind person, flexible, but America
deposited in him by stinginess - thrift, rudeness, selfishness
and, of course, lack of literacy and intelligence. I remember what
five
he was neat. Suit and hat (new at the time) always
hanging in the closet, as expected, boots (and in the most difficult time
life there were several pairs) shone and my face was reflected in them.
The hard collars turned white and changed. He was red-haired, slightly
freckled, fluffy, blue-eyed. This is how he appeared
in front of my mom in 1907.

My mother is Shifra Nakhmanovna Borukhovich. About her father, my
grandfather, to whom I was most attached, I already wrote.
Tall, slender, hunchbacked, dark-haired, good-natured - lived
near the town of Slutsk in settlements - Ostrov. My grandmother Pesya was a noble
kind, but impoverished, and she was married to a poor but learned guy.
Grandfather Nachman and his brother (Ynta Moiseevna's father) studied at the cheder
and then in the yeshiva - this is a higher religious school. Grandpa had and
general education above average, was by nature
cultured and charming person, respected by all in business
circles and the synagogue. They trusted grandfather, went for advice, went
to borrow and borrowed.

Grandma Pesa was given a legacy of a fabric shop, in which she
lasted very little due to poor health. By
stories grandmother Pesya gave birth to 11 children, of whom I knew
three - my mother, the eldest and beloved daughter Shifra, and the younger
Malku and Mikhail. The other children were spoken of in whispers. One
the guy was mentally weak and left home, they spoke at sea, and did not
returned. The rest of the children died in childhood from various diseases. I AM
I remember my grandmother was already sick. She died of kidney disease. Lay in
bed weak and, calling me, asked - has the ice already gone? (this is
spring was coming), I ran to watch the ice and, excited,
ran, hurrying to answer - yes, the ice is coming. Grandma sighed
said - here I will die soon. I remember even earlier - she still walked,
took my hand and took me to the shop of her friends, where she bought
cuts me for a few dresses for school. I remember the plaid dress.
So it was at my 6-7 years old. I went in these dresses
first time to school. I didn’t make a reservation, I immediately wore dresses to school -
one after another, so it seemed to me better to show myself, and besides
there was nobody.

So, my grandfather's eldest daughter was economic, smart
and, due to the illness of her mother and large children, she ran the household and
b
grandfather's affairs. Grandpa was a specialist in fur and other
agricultural raw materials. I remember that in his apartment there is always
there were bunches of dried mushrooms that smelled delicious. Him
brought processed animal skins, and he smoothed them,
evaluated and, never deceiving, said the true value. His
the word was law. Later, in the 20s, he was one of the first former owners
and small traders were hired by the Soviet customs ..
a specialist with payment of 25 rubles a month, was a member of a trade union,
which was very honorable.

My mom was smart and businesslike. They said that they
once a house caught fire, and valuable skins lay in the closet.
Grandpa jumped up at night, was confused and began to pray to God. My mum
in one nightgown - already a bride, she opened the window and
threw away all the goods, i.e. saved the grandfather and all his fortune. O6
this has been told many times and on other occasions. My education
mom didn’t receive was the eldest in the family and bore all the hardships
household. Drew my mother into politics, into public
a life. She participated in mutual assistance, was friends with the poor and
impoverished people, collected help for them, and helped
everything I could.

So, she was friends with Chaya Rabinovich. Her husband was very
educated, but sick and hunchbacked person, and this poor
the woman alone was forced to feed all her numerous,
a gifted and poor family. Mom helped them all the time, and in her
hard years helped through people, i.e. collected for them
donations. My mother was not a member of the Bund 1, but she was
close to them and close to the revolutionary movement. Why such
is a pretty and smart woman sitting up in girls? It happens. Was
she was a man who loved her very much, but he was a shoemaker and not a match for her -
prestige. Then it was very important - to take below your class
parents did not allow. When mom first met dad
she was attracted by his dashing look, composure, but his American
the character also did not leave her gaze. But it's time to create
family and they got married. Mom was given a little dowry -
a grocery store with ties, buttons, ribbons that
boxes were not only in the shop, but also at home under the bed. We,
7
the children who soon appeared played with this haberdashery, but give
she could not livelihood.

What do I remember? I wake up at night and hear my mother cry. Came out
barefoot in the hall, and there y a hot stove - dad, mom and
father's nephew is already a young man of 17-18 years old Tsukovich Israel,
the son of an older sister. Mom, in burning tears, tells him that
dad does not give her money for life and she has nothing to feed her children, and they already
then there were four and soon a fifth appeared. I remember how dad
frozen, came home in the evening displeased, gloomy, alone
dined and carefully cut off the crusts of white sieve with a sharp knife
bread, and we, a flock of half-starved animals, sat in the distance and watched him
in the mouth. Then he began to count the proceeds and put everything back together and
hid. Brothers, younger than me by 3 and 6 years, grew up weak c
round bellies from the excess Bulba they ate.
They sat down for cast iron potatoes, large, crumbly (now would not
refused such), and a glass of cucumber pickle and swallowed with
relish. Lsva was called that - potato. We were dressed somewhat
as. Since early spring, they walked barefoot, their feet were on tiptoe. clothing
went from senior to junior. I don't remember that we ate our fill
sour cream, eggs, even milk. I remember potatoes. They took school with them
apple or pear. It was the cheapest.

We also had happy days. Spring, April. Easter is coming soon. All
fuss. Winter frames are exposed and taken to the attic. My
duty - to wash the frames, wash the glasses with soap and then thoroughly
remove. Hanging lamp above the large dining table in the hall
metal, which I wrap with green tissue paper.
All kitchen utensils are thoroughly cleaned to a copper sheen,
whiteness, and then fried over a fire. After all, everything is needed for Easter
everything is new, sterile. Down with bread, cereals, everything should be
Easter - matzo, matzo, special wine, meat, chickens,
Easter fat. Old dishes are taken to the pantry, to the attic, all
the apartment is washed, painted, swept out and new, fresh is brought in,
specially Easter. All that is possible, we children, dragged to the river -
there is sand and it is free to wash and clean everything. Does laundry
mom, sometimes even invites the washerwoman. All white linen is boiling
rinses on the river, starch, and then is not swallowed with an iron,
a trolley until shine, soft and smooth. It's Easter.
8
But there are also Saturdays - holidays. Cleaning is in progress and
training. Even on Thursday evening, mom peels a lot of carrots, rubs
her on a grater and prepares a huge clay pot, entwined
wire. This is tsimes. A kugel is laid in carrots (flour
dressing - dough with a fat piece of meat). In another pot, too
bucket, cooked compote from dried fruits, mainly from apples
pears. Chicken is slaughtered on Saturday. This is also our job. I carry her to
butcher for a couple of cents. Somewhere on the next street in a small
he lives in the house. A butcher comes out, a thin man in a black yarmulke and
in a black long jacket, as all devout Jews go, takes yme a chicken by the withers and, goes a little into the garden. Bares the bottom
neck, pinches off a little feathers and chicks the neck. I close
eyes, the chicken beats, flutters, and then calms down, I take her by the legs
and drag it home. Then my job is to pluck it. I'm going to the barn
I put a kerchief on my shaggy head, sometimes an apron, and
I begin to pinch from the legs. Then the wings, and the most difficult of all the head.
The work is not pleasant, but necessary. I especially had a lot of them
pluck y grandfather when I lived alone with him after death
Pesya's grandmother.

Sometimes meat was cooked instead of chicken - lean beef. But
should have had a chicken by Saturday, and my mom tried. Friday
mom got up very early, lit up the Russian stove and put it there
pot with chicken, carrots and onions. It was broth and stewed
potatoes with prunes. It was called a golit, then it was put
pot of carrots - cimes, compote and black coffee (not real, a
surrogate). By the time we got up, mom had already managed the stove
went to work, help my dad in the shop, and I was ordered to wash
floors, they were once painted, but already wiped. Work
there were many. I washed the first rooms calmly, but when the turn
I reached the big kitchen, I, already tired, began to phony.
I missed corners, wiped poorly. The boys wanted to eat too
grab something, and I whipped them with a wet rag on my bare feet
legs. Sometimes this struggle and washing dragged on until the arrival of dad c
mom, and then I got it.

All day on Friday, we didn't really eat anything, only carried
pieces. But on Friday night, when the sun went down and began
long-awaited Saturday, we came to life. It was necessary by this time and
nine
go to the bathhouse or at home to bathe, clean shoes and clothes.
The main work was done by my neat and active mom, and dads
were afraid.

So, a festive dinner. At a long table laid on top
ordinary oilcloth with a white tablecloth, appliances are arranged,
small plates for herring or chicken liver pâté.
All clean, meek, hungry are waiting. Mom shares the chicken and
says “Chicken leg to men - dad and elder brother.
The family is on them, all our well-being. Wings for girls
they will grow up and fly away from us. "-" Mom, you gave everything away, but for yourself
left nothing "-" No, my dears, I have an ass -
I've had enough. "

We go to bed well fed, fed up, redeemed, and mom is still something
does not hear her. In the morning we wake up - every y bed
clean clothes are prepared, even shoes are all cleaned, and in winter even
everything is heated in the oven. In the morning they take their time, they ceremoniously go out into the hall, on
on the table there are extinguished candles that burned and burned out yesterday (their
you cannot extinguish), and my mother, covering her face with her palms, prayed for them.
In the morning, a pot of coffee is pulled out of the stove, we drink it,
snacking on my mom's baked goods early Friday morning. Stand in
buffet and kalas, which my mother also baked for Saturday. Everybody goes to
synagogue to pray. Everything in everything festive. We children go there too
we drop in, and more run around the courtyard of the synagogue-school. At lunch we
eat golit - hot brown stewed potatoes, put
broth, tsimes and drink compote.

Dad sleeps during the day. The shutters close, everybody walks on tiptoe
you can't make noise - dad is sleeping. Everything for Saturday. For this, all
week to malnourish, deny yourself a lot. But Saturday is holy
saints. And you wait for this Saturday, starting from Sunday. Saturday
you can't! - turn on the light, put it out, work, count money,
buy and sell - you can rest, eat, drink, sleep. Not bad.
I haven't told everything about Easter yet. Easter is the main holiday
spring, when a week's rest, cleanliness, satiety, pleasure.
Passover symbol is the liberation of Jews from captivity. Victory, it seems.
I have already written about the preparation for Easter. Matzah is eaten instead of bread. White
thin, but it was not and they ate thick, black, homemade, but matzah
and only matzo. It was used to make dumplings, cereals, flour with eggs. Our
ten
matzo was placed in baskets lined with white sheets in our
girl's room, leg-koge, in the corner, in the hope that the girls
will not indulge. But we indulged at nights - quietly under
blanket gnawed on matzo, I must confess.

They prepared a special Easter wine and treated it to an angel -
alio-ganova, who came as if that night. The youngest son was looking for
hidden matzah under the pillow near the father. They sang songs, asked
and in songs they answered in chorus. We went to pray daily and walked in
sunny April days. Forget about all the troubles, There were
holidays with fasting. I remember this feeling. "I will fast all
day. "- You're still small, half a day is enough for you. -" No, all day. "
- and I'm proud. So, on Friday they ate tightly for the last time, but
the whole Saturday is long and hungry. Waitin saturday
in the evening of the appearance of the stars - when it will be already possible to cook dinner.
Now you can. No time to peel potatoes. Mom washes the whole
puts it in a cast iron, floods the stove with birch wood, and behold
the iron pot is already boiling. The herring is being cleaned. I have a tail, but I have a head.
Daddy's middle. Whoever fasted - the first to sit at the table, and how delicious
potatoes with herring, how happy I passed the test together
with all the adults, fasted to the end.

All these are the holidays that are remembered - imprinted in connection with
joys, gustatory impressions. But let's remember o
everyday life, and there were a lot of them up to my 16 years old, when I
got on the train Slutsk - Moscow with a change, it seems, in Osipovichi,
Minsk and, it seems, Smolensk and came to the cobblestone - Belorussky
railway station - Moscow with a large wicker basket (we don't have
were found), in which my 2-W print dresses, winter
patched coat and even, it seems, a downy pillow or even
feather bed. Everything that my mother could give me. There was also a plywood trunk c
provisions. In a pocket sewn into linen, there were 25 rubles (capital
pretty solid and the only one that was y me later
during all the years of study and even work, my grandfather gave it to me).
Let's remember everyday life.

Dysentery. A girl named Dweira-Dora, a niece, came to us
my father. Mom was very, very kind and pitied everyone. Some kind of y
they had a misfortune at home, maybe she was left an orphan and her
sent to us. She was beautiful and stately, but I was 10 years old, and we
eleven
gnawed apples the size of a nut - just tied up, and there were
abundance - around the gardens are homeless because of the fire. I only remember that
I was sent to the pharmacy for medicine, and I was embarrassed to open the door,
sat on the street and did not dare to knock and open the door of the pharmacy - there
worked as a visualizer my uncle (my mother's cousin Haim
Yudya). I sat there. Then she ran home and lied that she was, that
there was no medicine, but they told me - no longer needed! I didn't understand right away and
I was even glad that it was not necessary. Looking at my gloomy face
Mom, I get it. Dweira was lying in the bedroom, already dead. From
dysentery she died. I remember that my mother tore her hair, she
she was also pregnant. We children were severely punished
do not pick or eat apples. In August 1921, my mother gave birth
daughter and she was named Dweira (Dora).

For water. We were not close to the well, they took water for all matters from
rivers. Mom sent us children for water to drink in good,
a deep well with a crane in the yard of a rich man (probably
he was paid for it). It was a little distant. I had to go
obliquely through the burnt, overgrown with tall grass former
street, past the ashes and ruins, around which they continued to grow and
bloom apples and wonderful Slutsk pears. It was not for us
very pleasant and we bargained - who to go, and often
were taking time off. Yet I remember the pleasure of this event.
A long pole was fitted to carry two buckets of water or
even 2 poles with good hewn handles. We go there for water
ran, jumping on poles, clanking buckets. Tried to go
company. The name of the neighboring guys - let's go with us for water. And they walked.
The crane in the well was going well and quickly, and the tub was full
bubbly, cold, tasty water. We are as happy as horses
poured, sighed and drank again (you can't indulge in the well
It was). Then they poured in small buckets. In the middle of the bucket ears
poles were threaded and carried out of the yard as immeasurable value.
They balanced, and in pairs walked along the deep, fluffy grass, along
trampled path, barefoot, straining its growing
young strength, feeling its tense muscle strength.
Boys, girls, all rejoiced together, laughed at work
NND $ mogo, necessary and pleasant. We stopped twice
M b and trgeu sprawled and looked up, shutting his eyes
12
and inhaling the aroma of fresh air, fresh green grass. Such
happiness was felt when the young body was in close contact with
wet, fresh-smelling grass. The grass grew there -
natural clover or, as we said, a stable. we
climbed and ran into the runs, tore chamomiles - large, full and
counted out - loves, does not love, spits, kisses, presses to the heart,
send to hell. Joy knew no bounds.

Our shore. The river Sluch crossed our sweet city of Slutsk
in half. They said I live across the river. Sadovaya street went like a beam to
river, and since our house was at the end, we had only
pass only the synagogue and cross a narrow, dusty road and
we are on the river. The shore was soft, sandy, trampled. On both
farther to the sides were wonderful thickets of water lilies and we, not
fearing the depths, they plucked flowers on long stems into wreaths. Coast
served us not only for swimming, for pleasure. we are here
learned to work - something that you can't learn in any workshop
Washing little things - it was our business all summer, and even in winter we went
rinse into a breakdown, without fear of cold and wind. Washed out everything
only in the hands and eyes climbed. The laundry was not dirty, we
carried away to the river. Washing was combined with bathing, i.e. we are dirty
soaped and left in the sun to reach, and then
rinsed thoroughly. You used to take some thing and
you will swim with her to a depth where it is better to swim. There were also losses. Y
I was even in trouble, quite a big one. Came from
Moscow's aunt Malka, she studied at the Krupskaya Academy. it
it was, however, already in 1925, when I was 14 years old. She arrived in
very nice dark marquise dress with white lace
collar and the same cuffs. She took off her good
Dress, a collar and cuff tore off for washing. I, without asking,
I took them as I was going to swim and wanted to surprise her.
Imagine that I lost one of my cuffs in the river.
I could not admit, I said that I brought everything - at home
lost, but I still remember how I suffered.
We cleaned dishes on the river. Sand, sand, handles,
Every speck was removed. And then it was rinsed and dried.
as a lady we carried a mountain of metal, a bundle of linen. Yes, they dried the clothes
they even spread the linen over the green grass and it is in the sun
13
bleached. We bathed the kids. The older girls drove
snotty, zakakanyh and all sorts of brothers and sisters, seated them in
water on the sand and scrubbed to white, and they both cried and laughed, but
always tied in with the elders. We swam until blue in the face, for hours
did not get out of the water. We went to teach lessons on the river and hid
from mom in case of trouble or leprosy, too, on the river. When I went to
to my companion Perle Rabinovich, I did not walk around across the bridge, but
took off her pants (or we went without pants at all), lifted
dress above the navel, covering the edge with its muzzle and crossing the river
wade. On this river, both adults wore linen to rinse, and water
carried for all other needs, and watered cows and horses, etc. River
was the second home.
There have been rivers and wars. Two teams of guys from both sides of the river
fought with wooden guns, cried and even were struck
and winners. We were afraid of these battles, and my mother did not let the brothers,
and they were also small. The young ladies from Troygai swam in the river,
suburb of the city. Beautiful, burly girls. Stood next to
the military unit and about the girls told badly. I go to them
swam, but did not meet. Those were the years when the book came out
Veresaeva "Behind a Closed Door", and in my head were already swarming
mature thoughts. Something itched at me, and I decided that I was sick
a bad disease from bathing with these girls. I endured for a long time, a
then she confessed to my mother and we went to the doctor. She examined me and
said "you read what you shouldn't."
A family. I would like to describe our life in my 10-13 years in my family
parents, since then the family broke up, my father left, and he took me to
my grandfather. So, my mother in August 1921 gave birth to the most
the youngest is the girl Dweir-Dor. The time was slow. Our
the haberdashery shop burned down, and in general the small seller is my father, and
already poor, ceased to exist. A must live, children ask
eat. I don't know what they were doing, I know that everything was unsuccessful.
We bought a cow, hornless, hornless, she ran away from the herd, and we
looking, always looking. So that we drink enough milk, this is not me
I remember. I remember my mother's very sad face darkened in her 40s
patio. She combed her hair hastily near the mirror - dressing table, and I
Mpdaornulae. She stroked my head and said: "so that you
Jts1ChKa lived better than me. "She tried to sew something for
fourteen
people, someone to serve, helping people. We did not see oil at all.
Once I got into the house of a rich merchant and saw butter on the table,
I was very surprised and I still remember how the stories told my mother o
seen.
They bought sieve bread for my father, and he cut off the crusts, and we watched
in his mouth and drooling. We bought potatoes in the village, in the summer
ate rotten thickets, very tasty. We have still bypassed the road;
a The Rabinovichs were starving and the children were released into the people, the elder Khan and
Sarochka. We went to school with Polina, there are not many of us
fed.
And at such a difficult time, my mother gave birth to a daughter and milk y
it stagnated - there was a breast. I remember a 10 year old like my mom
already a middle-aged woman, it was hard as she moaned, and I said -
"Mom, come on me." She lay down to her and sucked her mother's mouth
and spat out her chest, so gradually she moved away.
Bertochka, the Wolfson's youngest daughter, ran into the yard with
with a frying pan on which a layer as thin as tissue paper,
lay an omelet. It was an unheard of luxury for us.
Mom was busy with some kind of work outside the house and I, already a schoolgirl,
had to look after the child, rocked in a cradle - a stroller,
wicker. Girlfriend girls beckoned to the street, I couldn't
wait until my sister falls asleep and leaned on the swinging legs,
faster, faster, let him fall asleep, and then the rocking chair tilted and
turned over. The girl fell out and burst into tears. I was scared. Glory
God was all right, safe and sound.
This bedroom had a large wardrobe, and I loved
pull out mom's clothes and dress up. These are hungry and
cold years (there was little firewood, the house was old and we always
were freezing and warming themselves on the Dutch stove, wiping it with their backs and climbing into
oven), I pulled out a long black silk skirt and
Sweetheart White Black Polka Dot Curvy Mom's Wedding
blouse and wrapped everything on herself. Mom sometimes found me in
) TOM robes and her gloomy, sunken face expressed regret o
unfulfilled dreams. I remember my dad as thin as well,
mrpchy and even angry and nervous towards us guys. Well, a
we - in the summer we ran around the yard, along the street, to the river, to the guys, and in the winter,
poorly dressed, lounged at home in the hall. We were running around
15
a large long table, hiding behind its curly legs,
clung to each other, sometimes fought, piled up in a heap and again
they ran until they got a snitch and, crying, everyone started anew.
On one of the sunny days of the end of August, guests came to us -
Aunt Malka and her younger brother Mikhail who came from Moscow,
who studied in Leningrad at a medical institute and, without
consent of his parents and all relatives, suddenly married Haya
Pastron, a lively girl and as they said around - not for him (mother
Genie). Malka brought me a piece of chintz with brown stains,
immediately laid it out on the table, cut out the neck, kimono sleeves and
said - sew it yourself, take a needle and thread and sew carefully, a
make a round collar with a lapel. This was my first
independent work and taking care of my creative life - mine
Mom had no time to teach me, she had to earn a living.
Our neighbors in the house were elderly people - in one
an old bachelor lived in a small room, in another an elderly couple. And this one
the couple broke up, suddenly her husband died, and we all
participated in the funeral. According to Jewish laws, it was impossible
a lonely woman to live with a lonely man, and me
settled with this woman as an intermediary. I slept on a hard couch
and my mother made a bed for me with her clean one - everything is as it should be. Like me
got scared when a few days later I combed and while I endured
not understanding the reason for this. When everyone was asleep early in the morning and I
looked at the armpit, then terribly frightened. We crawled lazily into
the seams are huge white fat lice. I burst into tears and I'm not there anymore
spent the night. Now we do not know what lice are, but I remember them, and do not
time. Were then still sewn in 1933 in the Khabarovsk hospital, where I
lay sick with typhoid fever, they were in 1943 - hunger,
it's nothing you can do. I defended my three children as much as I could -
actively fought lice, but they were remembered, probably very
bored and frightened.
The first school years were hardly remembered. I went to school early
n n ') and' mu something not in the kindergarten (as it should), but in
n's bit Aunt Malka. I sat on the last row, and that's alln 'looked at me with subservience (niece
i s), since I didn’t understand that I have to study like everyone else. I remember
i "1 .i 'k1vkul. This was when Uncle Michael brought
sixteen
me a sketchbook with colored pencils. It was
news and luxury. Until now, we have written on scraps, and I
used the office books lying around us - narrow,
long. Already in the third grade, Aunt Malka brought me from Moscow
a notebook in an oblique ruler made of thick paper with a shine. I stroked
cover of the notebook and put it under the pillow at night. At night i
remembered about her, got up, pulled her out and impatiently
mornings to output '' on the front page of the neat, long-legged
Gothic German letters.


It was too far to go to school and my hands and feet were freezing.
When we went home, we warmed up in a huge oven opened in
bedroom, and fought for a place closer to her. In spring and autumn, I dressed
Mother's wide woolen jacket and belted tight. My
fluffy reddish hair replaced my hat, o shawls we
did not know at all. Our underwear was a spenzer - flannel
jumpsuit with buttons on the back and across the waist. Their mom
washed and repaired every week, and they moved from
senior to junior.
I also remember that my stomach was always growling and sucking in my stomach -
I was hungry, and we did not go home, but ran. We are our teachers
called by name. My teacher was Mogilevsky Meilakh and his name was
we are his "teacher Meilah". He was blind and clumsy and,
seems eternally hungry and unhappy. We communicated with him not only in
Iikole, but ran to his house, what they were doing there - I don't remember. Was y
"his niece - Liza Charnaya, who was my sincere
friend, and I hung around with them. Her father was a dentist and to them
they came to have their teeth treated from the surrounding villages and paid in kind. Around
. of these products and I was fed. She treasured her friendship with
me, but soon her father died, something I don't remember further about her
nothing, but very often I remember cute, curly, myopic
.vazu and even looked for her in Leningrad - already in the 50s, but alas ...
1; those I was looking for in Leningrad for my second cousins ​​Manya and
Minu (Nehamku), with whom we are in one bedroom, is cramped, bed c
we slept, stealthily gnawed matzo, helped my mother with
and listened to my father's complaints about the parasites in the leg-koge.
Mvnv was already a young lady and went for a walk in the evening, and we went
coooet. We spent time on the front porch in the house
17
and
r
Wolfson, now occupied by customs. Young employees of this
customs looked after Manya and her other friends,
late on the stone benches, where they gnawed sunflower seeds and walked
circle on the highway. The walk began towards the end of the day and lasted until
deep into the night. Was it daily or on holiday days?
I also went for a walk with Nina. We took two or three under the arms
and walked decorously along the sidewalk, as in a demonstration, there, i.e. to the bazaar, and
back - the other side, to a commercial school. Quiet
whispered. We used to go to a pastry shop to eat a cake
(if there was such an opportunity or someone treated). Feeling
pride that we are like everyone else. Dressing up their best, combing their hair like
adults, neat. We came home on tiptoe so as not to
wake up dad and not hear him grumbling. Our rooms were
covered with newspapers and we, waking up, read slogans. poetry, etc. we
knew and sang all the songs - "fried chicken, chicken
boiled, the chicken also wants to live. He was caught, arrested
ordered to put in jail. "
On January 22, 1924, in the evening, Aunt Malka and
told that Lenin had died. We have heard a lot of good things about Lenin,
read in the newspapers and everything that was printed. We also heard about his companions
- Leon Trotsky, Rykov, Bukharin, Zinoviev and others. Then they are still not
beaten by the opposition and were not isolated. We began to wonder who
will replace Lenin, they said - Rykov, and my older brother Abram
said that he wanted to take his place. Dad told him - that's it
learn, try. We already taught in grades 2-3
political economy, wrote essays and dictations - notes about Lenin,
o Soviets, about the October Revolution. I remember how I helped
older brother to teach dialectical materialism - read and
explained to him.
At the age of 12-13 I was already politically active and savvy. Was
such an organization is "Spartak". In my opinion, it existed before
pioneer organization. Each Spartak soldier had a stick-stick
l'IIIIIIIIm'i 101 <shovel handle, well, smoothly cut, long and
h. 141, We write it like a rifle. We marched with her,
   ,  n M itriin uchuii '1 p <HQ pvieipan neesn i. Very proud
.i, 'MMRSCHRI1isch ii uppim (' luIiF n irp • tsiigpi.Ys days, in
I) onrpa'tson. ‚Pgapptl% ii write siipni. 'Tio
I ii
 was
an ordinary skirt with a wide elastic band, the seams were not on the sides, a
front l back. In the middle of the skirt there was a slit to the middle, which
fastened with buttons. When buttons were fastened, around the leg
harem pants turned out. The blouses were white. Later we already
wore red ties, bonfire badges, and
komsomol khaki - breeches trousers, shirts for graduation c
fastener and collar, belted with belts and even t
proudly dressed in a dress, straps over the shoulder. All this form
finishing her cap.
Pioneer - Komsomol member
(middle row, 3rd from the left, Polina Rabinovich - 2nd from the right)
We, Spartacists, united in the Peretsaz club. It was
Jewish club. It was guided by our Jewish teachers and all the work
was conducted in Hebrew. In this club, I made friends with
Lenochki Rabinovich, with Perlechke - my age, and her eldest
Sister Sarrochka. I was not privileged in this club, because
was not of proletarian origin. They took me to this club
perhaps because of Aunt Malka, who was greatly respected. B
the hands of the club were elders, respected by us and very, very
comrades predisposing to the club's cause, like Movshovich, Lisnyansky,
1% ibp They spent days and nights in this club, they were sometimes
i oaidri, but did not show their state. The club revived in the evening.
1! M. пнiи бii report on a political topic. To be active I
nineteen
mastered the work of drawing up a resolution and wrote them each
evening. It consisted of general phrases: "the general meeting, after hearing
Comrade's report states - Lenin's cause has won! Great
October Revolution we pledge ... Signatures ...
Secretary T. Mostkova ".
With what pride I subscribed and mastered the style and
monotonous content and pathos of the new business. Later I became
pioneer Komsomol member. I remember the parade, build and each of us is the eldest
the pioneer leader tied a red calico tie on his chest
icon, world bonfire - 5 sharp fiery bends, - 5 cardinal points.
"In the struggle for the labor cause - be ready!" - and thunder overturned -
"Always ready" !! We sang a lot and the voices were good, sonorous, and y
I had a voice. I even tried solo singing and it worked out well.
This is from work, training, work - everything will grind!
What songs did we sing?
1.Kerzon4 wanted fish, wanted it, and flew to the White Sea, flew!
2.Pilsudski is dead 5, Pilsudski is dead, dead.
Z. We are a young guard of workers and peasants.
4.Our steam locomotive flies forward, at the commune stop.
5.We are all, we will destroy the old world to the ground, and then - we
our, we will build a new world, who was nobody, he will become everything!
b.International.
Our club was Jewish. It was called - named after Pered and
Sholem Aleichemab. Later we were given a 3-floor building for the club.
former commercial school, and the club was already
international, with different circles and a large program.
I was elected chairman of the sanitary commission, and I was very
proud and immediately took up cleaning the windows on the floors. Polina was
member of the board of the club. I actively participated in the work
bindery and learned this business. Our main
the work was still marching, agitation among the workers and peasants
(we went to the neighboring villages and put on performances, recitation from
pyramids). We arranged majors in the forest, made our way through secret
passwords, sang at the fire, circled, danced.
Slu ck
1911-1926
Me and my friend from school Atl Muler are sitting on their terrace
small wooden house and teach. We are preparing for
admission to a technical school, and necessarily a Moscow one. A month ago we
finished the seven-year plan and decided not to waste time and seriously
prepare for a trip to Moscow.
At school we took all subjects in the Hebrew language, and he
was our mother tongue. As a separate subject we studied
Belarusian, but of course we knew Russian and read
Turgenev, choking, all night long, but they well understood that
we will not be able to enter a Moscow educational institution,
if ... we don't work all day.
The windows of the apartment overlooked a wide, cool courtyard, dirty,
without greenery. Every now and then I looked up from the textbook and surreptitiously
looked with her eyes on the opposite side of the yard, where on the same
people were swarming about the veranda. I wanted to see HIM. I knew
that he completed the second year of the Minsk Pedagogical College and
came on vacation to his large, poor and rather
ii disorganized family. The father was a craftsman, he drank, and the mother
I didn’t make ends meet. Children were good and all in due time
studied at our school. He was sharp-eyed, although in his eyes I
never looked. Our love was on the sly. Back in the 5th
class, he gave me ... paints, and I disgraced myself in front of my own.
I put these colors in the pocket of my light print dress.
11 y, and my mother took me with her to the bathhouse, and there in the dressing room these colors
melted and flowed down. It was a shame, but I did not admit - where to
pit 'uti the paints hit,
I remember the notes he gave me. One of them hit
n the teacher's hands and, probably, my eyes betrayed me and I was
i iddpo. I remember that a bad story was told about him, and I
slabs to tear it out of your heart - passed by and did not
reap, but then she was tormented and looked for him with her eyes. He graduated
gmppsgku pa 2 years earlier than me, entered the Minsk Pedagogical College
20
21
and now I have arrived on vacation. The girls told me that he was there
has another and I didn't care, but still ...
Then I lived with my grandfather - my mother's father. Grandma died and he
one left. My mom was saddled with a pretty big family
but there was nowhere to work and nothing to live with. our grandfather was
respected person in the city, honest, calm and entrusted to him
procurement of furs and all agricultural raw materials. He was
in public service, was a union member and received 25
rubles per month. He lived in an apartment, occupied 2 rooms from the hostess,
who prepared dinner for us. It was my duty to support
their rooms are clean, wash for grandfather and yourself, wash
dishes. My grandfather promised to send me to Moscow next year
to learn, which he did honestly.
My two aunts lived in Moscow - Enta Moiseevna, who graduated
Academy them. Krupskaya, and aunt Malka, mother's sister, lived in
Moscow and Pactrons - the mother of Genya Borukhovich and her uncles and aunts. Many and
... nobody.
My grandfather loved me dearly. If I sometimes feasted on
bun, which was intended for him - he pretended that
does not notice. When I sat all night reading Turgenev, he timidly
answered from the next room - "daughter, you will not get enough sleep."
If I walked around late into the night with HIM and, guilty, quietly
knocked on the window, he got up, groaned and pronounced quietly to
the hostess did not hear: "knock louder, I feel better when you are loud
you knock, I immediately rise and open it to you, otherwise I lie,
I listen and I don’t understand whether you knock or not, and whether
a side apartment in the same building. The yard was large, with households.
buildings, a restroom in the depths, also stone and for some reason not
fenced off. The house where we lived and another Jewish family,
was located in the back of the courtyard with windows to the toilet, and we are interested in
was to look into them. The porch of our house, and the canopy, were
planked and skewed. The house was low but spacious. I remember
large kitchen with Russian stove, long kitchen table q
stools, a large dining room also with a long table covered
oilcloth with a hanging kerosene lamp. Along the walls stood an old
lordly furniture - mirror, bookcase and bed, and 2 bedrooms, one
after another, one of which was a girl's. The point is that in
hungry 20 year from Saratov, a cousin's family came to us
my mother's sisters are her husband and 2 girls Masha and China. Their mom
died there of tuberculosis. They settled at us temporarily and
girls, several years older than me, slept with me together in this
bedroom. The girls' father left to get a job. So now
they say, it's more honest to go to Minsk to buy and sell something here
more expensive, i.e. make money. These were the years of banditry. On the opposite
the way, the entire loaded horse train with goods was surrounded
byndites, who tied all the living to a tree, doused
kerosene and set fire. So Isaac, the father of Masha and Nina, died
Guitiik. And the girls stayed with us forever.
For some reason my father called our bedroom "foot-koge." What's this-
n, pz of the Talmud. In another bedroom there were boys' beds,
n '"pppka, where all our clothes were dried, washed in the evening by mom,
I dress them clean in the morning. I also remember the fire in the city center.
long. "In those hard, half-starved years, I and grandfathers passably
fed and, as they say, did not know the need. My mom lived on
Sadovaya street, in the past street of the rich, and after the fire there
only the synagogue and 2 houses on one side remained intact. All
the rest was ashes. I remember a beautiful, tall, stone
the front porch of the master's house. Behind him is a long corridor
beautiful house with large windows to the street. In my memory in this
ii how did the power change, which I do not understand even now,
Opshi Poles, White Guards, Bolsheviks, etc. I remember father
hippoinp in burnt houses, and I ran after him, and he threatened
h,., pd and uiiga. I was probably about 10 years old. I studied in
I went there at the age of 6 to the preparatory class.
I t and Milkakh was a teacher in the first or second grade, and I
and Oozhshsh to her - I could not understand in any way why I was not allowed to go where
the house housed customs and I remember a certain Smirnov - an employee! in ,. I remember myself in a big knitted sweater, my mother's, and I remember that
this customs. We, the children and the youth of the neighborhood, jumped to and fro at night. jumped up. I still remember - I reached the bazaar and
hanging around on this porch and gnawing sunflower seeds. Came back home, and on the way me
This house was probably confiscated, and the Wolfson owners lived in
22
23
arrested, it seems, were Germans or Poles. I remember from early childhood -
psya roll is a curse word in Polish.
I also remember - my mother gave birth and she had a baby. Like now
I remember - I lay down on her and sucked all the pus off her - sucked and spat in
a bowl. I still remember - I woke up at night from my mother crying,
hysterical. I jumped up and went into the hall. Dad, mom and stranger young
the person seems to be Isrol Tsukovich (my cousin). Something
mom complained about dad. I stood near my mother and, as it were, protected her.
More clearly in my memory - my political active
activity. Club them. writer Peretz. Stone two-story
house, below is a binding workshop. Meetings with reports, circles,
staging. There were talented singers, dancing in paper
suits. They put on a fairy tale - how the girl fell asleep and she dreams of flowers,
who sing and dance. And now, as a girl, I am sleeping, and the flowers are still
did not finish their role, and I woke up ahead of time and was
embarrassment. For a long time I could not recover from shame.
I was active in labor affairs and I was elected chairman
sanitary commission. The club included Sarah Rabinovich,
Movshovich (husband of Fani Iosifovna). Polina was very loved, she
byya chairman of the board of the club.
NEP has come. ' My father opened a haberdashery shop and
trading trifle. The need did not go away, but he had to live with him. I AM
was a pioneer and at the meeting wrote resolutions - "Meeting of young
pioneers, having listened to ... states. ..> '. My social position
I was very embarrassed, although they were
you can't do it - you need to rest, pray to God. Were not very
my dad and especially my mom are believers, but in public you have to observe.
The synagogue was next to our house, fenced in
wooden fence. In the 4th courtyard, we always played hide and seek. Men
put on a tales (white blanket), put it on the forehead and fingers
belts and prayed, standing with your back to the wall. I don't know prayers, but
I understand - they thanked and asked. Women took the places of A.
gallery, their heads were covered with kerchiefs. I remember they came occasionally
singers, and then the entire Jewish people poured into the synagogue.
Saturday was a very reasonable holiday, apart from resting it
gave a person a reasonable discharge. We swam on the eve, dressed everything
clean, festive, shoes shone, slept, ate, went to visit,
rested in the afternoon until deep Saturday darkness.
A special holiday was Easter - Passover. Prepared for her
carefully. Y my mom in the attic, packed in drawers, waited
piece set of dishes - Easter. The whole house was transformed. All
the ordinary was shaken out, swept out, pulled out. Everything is old
it was called chametz, unfit for Easter. Washed, scraped, glued,
painted. My responsibilities were after exposing the winter frames
Wash the windows, renew the hanging lamp with colored tissue paper and
Wash floors thoroughly. Mom washed and starch the laundry. Sewed
everyone has something new. Matzo was bought from white flour, and when hungry
whirligig - from black. I remember a dark, hard matzo that was not
bite without soaking, and we baked it at home ourselves - at home, i.e.condescending. I dragged paper, cardboard, boxes from the shop - everything, everything
for your club. He was dearer to me at home and ... my relatives, especially my father.
In his face, I saw our class enemy.
They helped a friend lie. Matzah was packed into large wicker
Ii q ipshi and covered with a white sheet. She was tempted to eat
i opica, but was prohibited. They put baskets in our maiden's, and
Mtikhoiho at night ... crunched. Mom made all sorts of matzo on Easter
Sieve bread, Y dad had a bad stomach and he was bought TOey - dumplings (kneydlah), jackdaws. I remember - seider, i.e. myself
sieve. Evening. He sits at the table in the hall and neatly cuts yk at the table. White tablecloth, red homemade in decanters
sieve crust. We, children, observe and then pounce on niipp. Each case (glass), a large glass with amber
them. Dad pours trifles on the table and counts - sorts the coin kisch sawing for HIM - God. All smart, cheerful, waiting.
Coin. 11, gi ipim, I3-year-old, asks kates (questions) - in a chant,
Mom on Thursday peels a lot of carrots for tsimes. Friday. IL, 'I sings too. Why - a story about how Jews
the Russian stove is heated and mom cooks for two days - tsimes, jellied meat, Hum i i ll poly, how they lived without bread and had to bake matzo,
cholne, gut - all this is put in a hot oven overnight and with appetite i, i.ii, .i was for HIM, so that he, along with all
eats on Saturday afternoon, Friday night. Celebration.
24
 Nothing
unraveling. On a chair beside my father under the pillow
25
there is a hidden matzah - a 13-year-old must find it. Will he find it? All
funny, but joyful and comfortable.
Spurred on, flushed, in a festive costume -
owner, father of a large family. Mom is always busy
anxious - today the queen, mistress, mother of a large family.
She divides the chicken for everyone so that it is not offensive. Each one
merit. Father - a strong shelf - he holds the family on his shoulders,
girls - wings - they will have to fly away, and she leaves herself
... nothing - ass. My good mother, I even forgot her face.
What else do I remember about Slutsk? I am a pioneer, then a pioneer
Komsomol member. Despite my non-proletarian origin, I
trust. I march in formation with a staff under my arm. We sing -
Curzon wanted fish, Curzon flew into the sea. Eh Pilsudski, eh
Pilsudski, eh. After the meetings, we enthusiastically sing the International8.
We go home in flocks, in boots in deep snow, in the old
coat. We do not go, but we run, and for a long time then we warm up the frozen
fingers and with great appetite and greed we eat delicious,
frozen potatoes, washed down with cucumber pickle. Arranged
May Day in the forest, away from people. With a sinking heart, I worry
I run from one contact to another, I repeat the password on the way, and on
the yard is already night, and we must not get lost and be in time for the fire in time.
A fire is burning, potatoes are being baked, which will be our dinner, and we
we sing in one voice - eh potatoes, gourmet, denier, denier, pioneers
ideal, al, al, he does not know pleasure, day, day, who does not
passed. Eh, you are a sweet potato, tooshka, tooshka ... Glory to our
Belarusian potatoes! What would we do without her? The most delicious
As Polino, we studied in the same class. She was very sweet.
Swarthy, with a little fluff on delicate skin, she was the youngest
in family. The elder Aug was already making a living from y strangers.
Sarochka is a fiery revolutionary, she was the instigator in the club
Presented and observed: honestly all the laws of our pioneers and then
Komsomol. She was principled in everything and jealously followed
our sometimes childish pranks, deviations from the norm,
"no, Sarah Rabinovich is coming." Boris, their brother, was the pride of the family,
and he was rarely at home. Somewhere in the town he had his fiancée Tsilya.
A house near the synagogue, across the river, a house on chicken legs. Rooms
tiny with small low windows looking into a large
walk-through yard. In the back room, father - almost always lay and
prayed. Mother was a small and inconspicuous, quiet woman.
I heard from my mother - I need to collect for them - this means that
there is no bread at home, nothing to live on, to feed. Then I no longer remember the house, but
an elongated room where they already lived without parents (dad died
with mom). I hung around with them, I remember they considered me a laughing,
they gazed lovingly but condescendingly. Anya has already worked somewhere,
r Iola and Sarah were still studying. Finally, I remember the master's apartment
Proletarskaya street. This apartment was confiscated y
the idea of ​​the rich from the revolution and given to Boris for use.
() Oetvnovka of the former owners is saved, Boris is driving somewhere, Tsilya
'h4e did not move, and Polina and I are running around the rooms, walking
AFCHFrami on Proletarskaya back and forth with everyone, like real ones
flq and run to the club, to our dear and beloved club, to whom we
s $ i0M all the warmth of their hearts.
I remember the dishes - both baked, and potatoes, teihouses, and did we bother? Yes! I remember the school - Jewish and real.
fried onions, and with brine, it was incomparable. Y my 'nn ip. mathematics - Broyde. Rusk, a gloomy man of about 45.
Lyova's brother had a good appetite, and he was able to eat the whole II and III grade quickly and starts. The class is dead quiet. I AM
cast iron potatoes with an enamel half-liter mug of brine, a,.,. Sia M that thought and lost the thread of explanation. I AM
his belly was big - we slapped him on the belly and called him I 'HIllIlK'), and, finally, joy - I understood the theorem. Teacher
"Potato". And its edges were easy to count and all were thin -t and ng (there i back and repeat the theorem or problem many times.
only one blue eyes looked at the roll. Neighbor, with children 11 0 9 iodiate heads and are silent, and he, as in hypnosis, repeats and
whom I played, said - "here is Tanechka, a golden girl, a whole piaIyp1F ?, (and (kopits stops. I love mathematics. They wrote
plays for a day and doesn't even ask for food. "We are MI mti (klkh, boom ° and it wasn't good, - when Malka brought me
My happy pioneer years, when I was accepted on equal terms ^ 1.111 and a few common notebooks, I gave one of them to algebra and
into a large working family, were associated with the Rabinovich family. ('
26
27
according to Shaposhnikov's book - Maltseva solved everything, from the beginning to
end.
Now I am 65 years old, and with my grandson Igor I easily solve the same
equations - remembered for a lifetime.
I had abilities, but I studied average. Wrote well
essays and everything, however, on the topic - the revolution and Lenin. They to me
were given. I remember the history of history9, they paid a lot of attention to it. My brother
Abram, 2 years older than me, could not learn it in any way and here is my mother
made me teach diamat with him10. I remember - the number goes
in quality, etc.
Before my eyes - the evening of January 22, 1924. The whole family is in full
collection. We had dinner. lit the lamp. It's still noisy and the guys are running
around the table and play hide and seek. Aunt Manka came and told
all the latest news. Lenin is dead! Everyone was on guard
the kids fell silent. What will happen? Who will replace him? How life will go
farther? I ran to the club. It was mourning and we gathered in small groups and
preparing for the collection. Mogilevsky's mourning speech - study, oath
Leninists and tears.

The last thing I remember about my mother's house is my father's departure. we
we are all sitting on a cart, dad, mom and we are 5 children. Dorochka 4-5
years old. I'm already a young lady, I'm a little ashamed to go in a cart, but I understand
that we need to be with mom, with children and we go far to the station, throughout
Proletarskaya street, past our club. Daddy's still going
several men. They go from Russia to Mexico, a mother and we
stay. Dad is leaving not from a good life and not because of political
beliefs, although he does not like the Bolsheviks and calls them shantrapa.
There is really nothing to live with, nowhere to work, unemployment is terrible, yes
and dad does not know any craft, and besides, he is drawn to America,
On the eve of my departure, my mother was combing her hair in the mirror, and I went over and stood
beside. I remember - she ran her hand through my curly hair,
and said - my daughter, let you live better than me. " Train
left and took our dad away. Next year we went to Mexico again
several families, and dad ordered Abram to be sent with them that mom and
did. He did not want to study, there was nowhere to work, and dad lived there
one and we need to help him make money.
4
Our family before dad's departure, 1925
I i OM time I had to go live with my grandfather and I
or visit my mom. Grandfather sent her a little flour, then
where he came from as a young guy in order to get married and here
I'H mpi1 or money, and she herself sewed on strangers - by a master
now, burdened with a family, unsettled, he hopes to find there
Ipotsp "since she was and did not earn much. The children grew up, and together with
your happiness. They are not allowed there and you can go to Mexico, which
NIMI N rieho) rd.
next to him and here it is - he goes there, and then he earns money and takes
MY last year of life in Slutsk, in the city where I was born and
wife and children. He dreamed that he would live frugally, that my parents would be welcome, or maybe the grandparents were
save in everything, will hang the sausage to look at it, a
NCHmnp'pi. I wrote that I was getting ready to enter the big life,
he will eat bread with water, as he told us everyone is doing,
# 10 pshi M n.rn and up to yourself. It is necessary to gnaw the granite of science, respect
who want to go public. The mother cries quietly, but in fact, the children and children must join the Komsomol
in fact, the situation is hopeless. Rides not one fell and it calms.
28
29
- deserve it. One winter morning a bitter mouth came into the house. Son
grandfathers, beloved and unique, handsome and talented,
employee - inspector of the Belarusian People's Commissariat for Education in Minsk -
committed suicide - hung himself on a towel in his
little room. It was difficult to look for reasons, but grandfather did not grieve
borders. He cut all his clothes, sent his gray-haired
head, sat on the floor and cried. My mom and Aunt Malka got sick. His
Genya's wife and daughter lived in Moscow. Malka graduated from the Academy.
Krupskaya in Moscow and was appointed inspector of the Narobraz in
Bobruisk. Her fiance cheated on her - he married her friend. To that
time, Faivel Harak appeared, which Malka loved very much, was
a good, calm person, but could not extinguish the fire of suffering
in Malka's soul. Faivel settled in his grandfather's apartment to
stay when I leave to study in Moscow. So, in the last months we
the three of us lived and I had more time to study. Mom to me
made a pair of cotton dresses and one combined woolen dress.
Everything else was old, but patched, clean and quite
decent for a trip to Moscow. Grandpa saved money for me 25
rubles, it was enough for a ticket and food
as it says, carried it. B first winter holidays, and they y me
were very short, I did not go home to my mother, but ... to some
a place near Minsk. Dveira Ostrovskaya lived there, HIS senior
sister who also graduated from the Minsk Jewish Pedagogical College and
she worked there as a teacher. Why did I go there? I remember c
bitterness. HE did not write a single letter to me and I, of course, from
pride too, and I did not know his address and his fate. Someone to me
wrote that Dweira is already working, and I went to find something o
learn it. It seems to me that I did not even ask about him and in general
there was no question of him. Maybe I drove home, it was close there,
it was erased from my memory.
1
for about a month, and then we'll see. The summer was warm and
my soul was happy.
I'm going to Moscow. How many have already heard about Moscow, and I am there
I will live as long as y Aunt Yanta, and then I will do, y I will,
of course a hostel. Study, study and study - Lenin's words we
knew by heart. And HE is next to me. I have no time during the day, but in the evening
we walk up to the roosters. In the cemetery, which is close to our house.
He kisses me, swears that he always loves and forever, that we
will definitely meet. He goes to study in Odessa at the theater
He quits the studio - a pedagogical college, I leave for Moscow, 1926.
The last whistle. My big wicker basket, where is mom
put my feather bed down (how can I sleep without a feather bed) immerse me in my bed and tell the story of my first, bitter love, I'll finish -
compartment in my place, everyone comes out, waving, mom cries, we say goodbye, Mri detti h aktg that their mom was once young and
our eyes meet and I'm driving. I feel the pocket on my chest with my hand, Mm it was accidentally worn out after 9 years. I gave birth to Nusenka y
where my mother sewed my capital and attached a ticket so that she would go to 1itebsk and on the eve of May 1, 1935
lost. I'm going to Moscow.r 1gird0idzhan to my husband, who was waiting for me with joy c
More I am in my native and in childhood my beloved city of Slutsk in the city with a friend from Slutsk - Mnukha and suddenly
never returned. I didn't have to. Life picked me up and
thirty
• tour of the Odessa Jewish Drama Theater.
31
The actors of the theater and his name are participating. I say let's go see
and we will see it. I came home, I talk and laugh - I will see mine
first love. Faivel, Malka's husband, went to the theater with us. The first
we calmly watched the action, but it was nowhere and in no one
learned. I say - let's go and look for him, it's interesting after all. I do not
dared, and Mnukha went backstage and returned with him. My feet
gave way, speech ceased, I stood and stupidly looked at my feet, and he
said something to me, and I was glad to call - went to their places,
I feel a warm breath behind my back and his hand in the darkness lay on
my shoulder. I sat quietly, but I saw nothing or heard from
happening on the stage. When the second act ended, he took me
by the hand and led. A pregnant woman was sitting on a chair - I have no face
I saw it because did not look at her. He pushed me to her and said -
Tanya, this is my Tanya, about whom I told you a lot. What are we
I don’t remember, but I had a terrible feeling, I
cursed for everything. Fool, fool! We walked home and laughed, more
I was all over myself, but they came and told Malka laughing, laughing. She and
says - well, you, go quickly to your Joseph, or else
Malku. A few words about him. He was an old bachelor. He got married
late for the also middle-aged Pastron - Samuel's cousin and
Chai Pastron, i.e. Gena's aunt. A couple of legends were told about them.
When Slutsk was occupied by the Germans, and all the Jews were
destroyed, he continued to work in the same pharmacy - to the Germans he was
needed as a specialist and he was not touched. When he felt or,
maybe they suggested that an action was being prepared for him, he was at lunch
gave all his household and himself, including poison and the whole family - old
aunt Yakhna, wife, three children, and he himself were poisoned and thus did not
gave themselves to the destruction of the Germans. Another daughter of aunt Yakhna (I
never knew) married a Russian (which was considered terrible
sin) and left with him to Penza, where Malka with her husband and children
I met her at the beginning of the war, in the evacuation. Enta Moiseevna -
my mom and Malka's cousin. She was born and raised in
$ obruisk, and I met her in Moscow, and
After, when we lived in Velikiye Luki, and Klara went to Leningrad
study.
Grandma Song died of kidney disease when I was 6-7 years old.
do something stupid. It was May 3rd — we left in the evening, I think she was sick in bed in the spring. She probably was ill for a long time, because
to be in Moscow in the morning. There were many things to do, Nysenka was fighting and going out into the street. She called me over and asked - the river is already
month. Not a boy, but a doll. Round, naked, smiling and everyone
favorite. He showed up early in the morning. I was in a robe and getting ready
bathe, wash and pack. The whole family greeted him cheerfully, and
I said calmly (everything passed) that I was in trouble all day and
in vain he came so early. "I will help you in everything - I will
study "- all day spun around us, and in the evening together with everyone
Lazy, did the water go? I gladly answered her that yes, it is already spring.
, I'll die soon - she replied. I don't remember her funeral. It
come from a wealthy but impoverished family Pole - (by
Mind), and therefore she was married to a good woman from the
(ato was considered privileged) a young man -
TyachiE (place of the Island) means not urban and poor. I AM
led to the station, and we shook the steering wheels in a comradely manner. That oka was happy with him, tk. my grandfather was
Since I am finishing my "story" of life in Slutsk, I want a young, delicate, very self-possessed and intelligent person. A
my children knew a little about our relatives. Aunt Malka - to my mother's I Tall, slender, dark-skinned, bony. Love y us c
everyone knows our younger sister. She replaced my own mother for me, and she is in Eaimaya. He called me "daughter" and never loudly
I'll write more about her. My grandfather went to live with her in Vitebsk, and I have another 00 by Me. They had 11 children, but only four grew up.
I saw him once and was with him in 1932, when I first arrived OUIIRO YEARS We were dying early due to various diseases. Mom to me
with dad (Joseph) from Birobidzhan. rrsskzvzal on the fate of her younger brother. He ran away from home
My grandfather's sister, aunt Yakhna, lived in Slutsk when I was my age. He served in the navy and never returned home.
son Chaim - Yudl. Aunt Yakhna was an energetic woman emi $ tsp'i (Mikhail), I already wrote.
kept a grain shop and managed. Her son Haim Yudl was in love with some simple guy and it was not
pharmacist and served in the Gipchin pharmacy. Large - similar to M "husband, uv pogo ps gave out. She stayed up, as they say, in
32
33
I
girls. And here came from America a handsome man with a mustache, curly,
redhead, and she was married. She told me that she wanted love, and she
hoped that she would, and the father was from a different test. Person,
of course, honest, decent, but did not understand my mother's romance,
although he was faithful to her all his life. My father is small-town, his father is Leo
died early, leaving mother and children alone, and all the elders departed for
America and Poland.
My father lived in Slutsk with his family (he returned from Mississippi
about 1905-8), his sister Lubke - mother of Bronya and Grisha from
Leningrad, and in the dacha Urechye near Slutsk, another sister Etl - mother
Musi and Ani Reznik. Khaya's old grandmother lived for several years.
us, and I remember her trunk with balls of multicolored threads - she
1. Abram was born in April 1909.
2. Taiba in June 1911
3. Leib in August 1914
4.Mixl in November 1917.
5. Dweira in August 1921 of the famine year.
Abram finished 7 classes in Slushka, and did not study in Mexico,
helped dad. Married for the 1st time and had 2 children Nohem and Pesya, 2nd
times - 3 children.
A label in Mexico graduated from high school, married a Mexican Chelo and
n chalk 6 children - Lucy, Shifra, Pesya, Moses, Lazarus, Ida.
Mikhail had a son, Albert (died at the age of 13 from Botkin's disease) and
daughter Sylvia, born in 1956.
always knitted. I don’t remember when she left us, or maybe My grandfather on the father’s side Mostkov Leiba, Khaya’s grandmother.
be dead. I do not remember. We loved Aunt Etl from Urechye very much. For the father's brothers and sisters, their children and grandchildren live in the United States.
it was a joy for us children to go to Urechye in the summer. Uncle Samuil Reznik Grandfather from mother's side Borukhovich Nakhman, grandmother Pesya.
was an employee on the railway. Urechye station - he was in charge of fuel, lived in the side of my mother, I knew and loved her younger sister Mayaka for many years
a state-owned large wooden house. There was a tank in the yard c1gorukhovich, she married Faivel Harakh, they had children -
kerosene and it was very nice and cool during the summer heatwave cousins ​​Misha and Polya (Pesya). Now all of them
lie there. My aunt sent us with a hammock to the forest and gave us R N, the children and grandchildren live in the USA and Israel.
a bag of provisions. I remember very well cheese (gomilka) -Mod mother Shifra Nakhmanovna Borukhovich, was born in Slutsk in
dried, like bone, cottage cheese. We gnawed at him. Was muffin, fruit 1 year, died in Mexico in August 1962
Her talk was special - bubbling, sonorous and very pleasant Mi 'Lapa Isrol Leibovich Mostkov (Mostkoff) was born in 1880
Uncle Samuel was a kind-hearted man and loved to joke with us. II Gu M and totochke Island, died in Mexico in 1956.
I remember! Morning. Everyone is already on our feet, but we are sleeping, walking until late. I Jonronones in Mexico City at the Jewish cemetery.
Ah, those Belarusian summer, odorous nights! Is it possible at 12-13 years old
go to bed early? I covered myself with a blanket and wrestle with a nap
Uncle stands facing the wall in a tales and belts and prays, humming ...
tickles my heels with his fingers, and I choke with laughter. a lion
Reznik had already fallen in love with girls, and Hanele was still sucking her lip, and we e
teased, did not want to take with them to the forest. The grass is high, highsoft. Fall on her, arms outstretched, and she closes you o
sun. Sleep. Sleep sweetly, sweetly. I remember Uncle David's house
aunt Lipke. They processed animal skins and they had
warehouses are cool and damp. They lived on Bolotnaya Street and masonry
whistled as we walked towards them. I remember the departure of their daughter Lyuba
Poland, was a beauty (this is Hanele's mother from New York).
Y my parents had 5 children.
34
35
Moscow
1926-1930-1931gg
Everything is like a dream. Farewell, farewell, farewell. The main thing is the order -
be sure to take a cab at the station, and this was separately
postponed a trifle 'Address - Bolshaya Pirogovskaya 2a. Half empty
wagon, wooden shelf, and me with a huge, but soft wicker
a basket in one hand and a grocery bag in the other. Swung
and the memory of her remained for me all my life. By the way, all my life
lucky for good people. The next day she took me with her
to the center and we got on the bus. These were small buses c
spring seats. I sat down and fell through and laughed out loud.
Everyone turned around, and I said - "you sit and drive!"
I remember Moscow in 1926. Yeseninschina. B the bus got a man
and the woman is naked. They talked a lot about suicide. Okhotny Ryad -
reads, where everyone hunted. We bought 2 bags of charcoal,
and it started, went, then everything ran, and I'm on my way. For the first time in "m we were heated and cooked. We went to the museum of fine
a long journey, even to Moscow, and one and for a long time, and maybe even arts. Then I began to walk myself to Zubovskaya Square,
forever and ever. I traveled by train several times to see my aunt Etl (mother Kropotkinskaya street through Petrovka, to the Myasnitsky gate. There,
Reznik Soap and Ani) to the station Urechye, which is 20-30 km. from us, but 1, iChistye ponds, lived the Pastrons. 2 large rooms, but residents
no further. Now there will be transfers, two or three, .pp \ (there were a lot. My aunt Khaya managed to get married and together with
main in Minsk - the largest, largest city of Belarus, oiii with a shorn-hearted Yessei and Genya lived in the same room, Tanya, Samuel and
which I've heard a lot. Was I afraid? Not. I remember how I was on • 1, Ipt with my husband on another. I was unwanted by them, but they did not expel me either,
Belorussky railway station in Moscow I climb into a cab and, l n pdila. I have to go somewhere.
fastened with belt styling. The coachman is huge. Tied up I was from them the Bauman technical school was located.
with a bright sash, takes next to him my basket and carries me on I 11 learned, it is difficult to enter. But I started with him. Filed
address. I am not in the least afraid of anyone. The horse jogs, clinks, and passed the exams well, even good in mathematics.
clatter of hooves on stones, and here we stopped. We arrived, accepted, who then hung in the courtyard of the school, my
get off. pg turned out - there were 10 applications for one place, and
• It is close, B. Pirogovskaya, from the Belorussky railway station. Everything, IISCH.IpiMdpp ii first of all children of workers and peasants, and I was
arrived. A large, white, corner, manor house with some kind of tower, „i p, Ngrki dsdy, i.e. employee.
From the side of the alley, the front door with a bell. There he left me1'Iv19rotiil, I came home and found aunt Entu there
cab. I knock on the door. Shyly, then bolder and more. No one, ▶ no one. Oli was unhappy. Without her consent they sent
I leave the basket and turn the corner. Yes - baby salads were prod. The point is that E.M. in our family
The front garden and the children are running. A passer-by woman understands that she was bloody, She lived all the years alone, got used to strict
a provincial woman and says to me - they will steal your basket, it will lead you to a good life. In general, she realized that she owed me
Moscow. It is necessary to call, but not to knock. I'm running for the basket and already looking to get away from me. In the People's Commissariat for Education, she had
through the bars and looking through the eyes of adults. I scream. I was approached from ii, 'pggooali go to agricultural
a pretty middle-aged woman and I explain to her who and why they are small and most importantly they feed when they work. I AM
here. She shrugs her shoulders and regrets - Enta Moiseevna seimAUMMumon 's And 2-3 weeks went to work in the greenhouses and
lives in Leningrad, her room is locked. Probably, by the expressed MORAMI E times a day. In the morning and in the evening it was
She understood everything of my face - I have nowhere to go. The gate opened with tea, and in the afternoon a vegetable lunch, quite
she told me - don't be afraid, I won't leave you on the street, you will
live y me until your aunt arrives. She lived for a long time, no matter how long she was, that is, they did not accept it, but if 7
36
MRM will be accepted. While I was working and renting
37
exams, I got used to it and began to speak Russian better (I knew
Belarusian) and we, the candidates, moved to study in
a seed-growing technical school near Moscow at the Bitsa station, where
they took us without exams. We worked there and studied,
went to Moscow to visit - is there a place. Finally in January
for a month I was admitted to the Moscow Garden and Garden College
named after Timiryazev, and I became a real student. I went to see E.M.
behind the basket. I remember the steps I went down to her
escorted to the street. She told me - goodbye, - and I her
wanted to kiss, but she turned away. I never went there again
never.
There were 7 girls and 19 men in the group. Most of all was
men over 20, and even over 30 years. Were from the ShKM (peasant school
youth) from the villages of Orel, Ryazan and other Russian corners.
There were few urbanites. I studied well because prepared was
better than others. There were three of us Jews - me, Efim Bretner and Rita
Magidina. I made friends with Ksenisy Andreeva, and I want about her
and had breakfast there for free. Usually we are in the morning
worked, came to the classroom hungry, frozen, c
with wet feet, and when lessons began and we were warming up,
I was terribly sleepy. And then evening came, and we hunted -
where to go. Well if it was after receiving the scholarship
(we received 14 rubles, of which 8 rubles were given for food).
First of all, we bought for 1 ruble. - 100 "transparent" candies - tai
they were called on Mosselprom trays and sucked them endlessly.
One candy could be sucked all day.
We went to the cinema. The theater was worse, it was difficult without a ticket
was to get there. I remember a whole story - how we watched the premiere
"Lyubov Yarovaya" with participation, it seems, of Vera Pashennaya. In the pocket
iii seed. The girls went on foot. And here is Nikitsky Gate, Okhotny
rztsl and we are in Maly. The play begins and we tumble
lost tickets. They were, but lost on the road. They believed and we are on
+ Ilerks. We sit, watch and laugh. On the way back they rumbled
and
gkgludki, and we decided to get on the tram without a ticket. The car was
tell in more detail. She was a Chuvash. Her mother brought in years
hunger in the Volga region and left with her brother to sit on a bench on
Kazansky railway station. They were taken to an orphanage, where they
n chnyi, but the closer we got to Kudrinskaya, the people
I .i and it turned out less, and the conductor asked - girls, where are your
, pipggy? I don’t remember anything. Everyone jumped off on the move, and I fell on
were brought up. She never remembered her mother and brother, and she broke her jaw, i.e. dislocated her. Walked for a long time
maybe she didn't know about them. She was small, frail, but very iliiinq jaw.
smart, one might say - talented. Knew Yesenin by heart, Blok IzzChFN loved Vorovskogo Street. Through it we went to
others, and I was very jealous of her. She was heartfelt, and all my life, yes, yooooooot and spent hours there. Ksenia got into the habit of one
now I wonder why we have never met in life more? h, we go to the Public Library. You will put on all the best - there
We lived intensely, but cheerfully. Our hostel was vp! nd flutter, climb the stairs and see all of yourself in
a wooden 2-storey house on Kudrinskaya Square, and walked in a mirror. You sit at a table under a blue glass shade
early in the morning on foot to the technical school, which was located next to si he 'gepli, it is pleasant to read, read, and suddenly the call is already 12 hours
Trekhgornaya manufactory, past the windows of which we passed. ЧЧН, Пнблиотекп is closing. Even completely. flew by 4-5
We worked in greenhouses, greenhouses, in the field. Our legs have always been, Nipplems, we and Ksenia are cleaning women in the workers' school, which
raw, and we were always cold, because were poorly dressed. I dreamed about Voroshilov's wife, I think Ekaterina Ivanovna. Two on
black skirt, white cambric blouse and o sturdy boots, Lazy. Day I, day she. We wore an apron, red
There was no hunger. We always chewed something, sometimes rhubarb, sometimes cabbage, MrpA1nru ppgplovu, and swept, washed the floors. The students pestered
carrots, and the stomachs with pleasure digested everything. OM Mri gop was given out that they are also students. Went to the station
The botanical garden where we worked, we knew how our ogorid, orumpp ioiirs - lifted a sack of potatoes and carried them easily.
At one time we settled down to a dispensary, which was difficult and difficult. We dreamed of love, of material
manfacture.
 We took care of flowers, and for this we have already drunk
38
and you, by the way N once dreamed
Z9
 o chocolates -
I will work, y they will always be in my closet, and I will take them when
I want to.
Several pairs stood out - the most successful, a little
envied. They seemed to be happy, although not all
survived until the end of the technical school. In the 2nd year, I became friends with
Grishka Tukhmanov. We went to the movies together, even once
were visiting y his brother. Can't remember anything
romantic, it seems they have never kissed, but attracted to him
talk, take a walk. Fifth, Valka took it away. Valka life
energetic, funny and easy-going with guys - changed
several in 3-4 years, and in the last year she ended her life
Professor Edelstein12 came and in his speech told the following
parable o6 Ivane. “They dressed Ivan in a jacket and told him: When
button up the first button - climb a certain
height, fasten the second button - rise higher, then
even higher, and Ivan shouted - I understood, I understood everything, and began to button
and rise higher and higher, and when he reached the sky and stopped,
he didn't know how to get down to earth again. - Don't be Ivans,
live on the earth, hold on to the earth! "
In the spring of 1929 we were assigned to collectivization. Me
sent to the Pronsky district of the Ryazan region. Commune. Early
Yesia, the snow hasn't melted yet. I run an agricultural engineering school. For a long
suicide.inium men and women are sitting in fur coats, we go through the villages, we look
Ksenia was reserved and outwardly nondescript. Once she told me, ri 'burn. Forges are working, fixing equipment, getting ready. Canteen,
says - “Sashka Makarov (25 years old handsome man and sang) ii ,,, r sits free - thick oatmeal jelly, cabbage soup, sour cream was
I declared my love for you - let me take care of you, and I told him that, i, delicious. Together with me from the Timiryazev Academy there
she replied - that I can’t help you, that you will take care of me? ”You are a tall man, black, it seems by the name of Svinenko.
I must say that I was unhappy with my appearance in those days, by the evening he caught me, wanted to use force. But I c
youth. From early spring I was covered all over from the sun III, I hit him in the face and opened some kind of gate that
freckles and my nose all the time peeling, peeling off 10 skins, the sticky scared him away. Soon he disappeared - he was afraid.
exposed neck and arms also suffered from the sun. My thick, even I drove around the villages, it seems for conversations, with us there were musicians,
very thick, too thick curls fluttered in the wind and he concerts. For some reason, a lot of people were with failed
it seemed that I looked like a witch. I had to make a hat izlmp s ps understood the reasons, then they explained to me -
colored stocking and pull your curls into it. I was poorly dressed, like hereditary syphilis.
everything, although I could ask y relatives for a good dress, but ps, l, l and sit in a cart with a driver and two women, somewhere
I wanted to stand out. I was serious and at the same time laughing. 'I' Yurug - Tvtyapa, what nation are you? I am, I say, a Jewess. - Not
She could laugh - go in for almost no reason. Once, you are completely different from them. You are very good. And you
I was kicked out of class because I could not calm down - stop 'mm. iogdp? I asked him. No, he says - I heard they
laugh.
There was a military teacher for us in military affairs - a military man by the name of StoM bpl 11, as it was short, but I felt
Once, when we were standing at attention in the ranks, he said that if he wanted to finish his studies as soon as possible, to be with people,
hard trials and he needed 6y a faithful friend, he was 6y chosen „i, lI, 1111W, B 'come on, in the spring they sent me to the neighboring c
whom? Everyone was waiting and suddenly - Mostkov! I blushed and everyone watched iiiIL sh „arrange the early cabbage landing.
me. I “lie zhiish personal economy and were mostly
I wrote few letters home and did not miss home, did not survive II% of ironic houses, knew agricultural technology, but here they
so it seems to me. l, s • upppp n '1'OZy (partnerships for joint
Time flew by, we took part in the graduation parties of the 1st p rpiomy, We were sent to lead them.
senior students and waited for their
 queue. Once upon a time
40
41
I remember I came to the village early in the morning in the frost - on the site
nobody here. I went to the huts - and no one goes to land - they meet
me only old women, the young ones hid somewhere. I am a few days
I went to that village in a row. I remember the teahouse. Men at the tables
They drink tea from saucers with a small piece of sugar on the cheek. On the tables
a large porcelain teapot for each. All steamed. AND
we drank and the tea was really delicious and the sweetness was pleasant.
We were already considered almost agronomists and went to organized
garden farms to work. I remember the victory! Everyone was given
their rows of wilds, a bunch of cuttings cut from cultivars
apple trees, in hand, and wet the knitting in the belt. With what dignity I
looking at their neighbors - study friends, special
We went together to the consulate somewhere in the center. The fact is that
cipher card - i.e. the visa was also for me, and I said that I would not go, I must
I have to finish college. Mom did not mind, but the one who made out
documents, looked down at me and grinned - I don't remember that
he said, but something offensive to me - like a fool! One night
Mom spent the night in my dorm and I remember - she patched me
leaky coat.
We all went to Lenin's mausoleum - my mother looked into Lenin's face
it is courteous, and when she left, she said - “My daughter, I don’t want to go there,
11 0 there is no other way for me if I could work here even
a cleaner - just to earn bread for my children, I would not go,
would be with you. "
I used the budding knife to make a T-cut on the best part What could I do for her? I have another year to study in Moscow and
wild, cut off the eye correctly and, spreading the bark with a knife, the wild, u the country unemployment. Father and Abram are already there. Thoughts were about
I planted a hundred under the bark, squeezing my fingers, like then with a washcloth, I I I will finish college and go to Mexico - after all, they are coming to us from
tied a peephole on both sides. The norm was - 1000 pieces per shift.rui from their countries and ours are going, I can go through the Comintern even to
The ranks of each of us were recording shamelessly, and according to the survival rate of the eyes, we did a lot of work. And my mother agreed with me, and poor mother
our progress was assessed. My rows were good, I was waiting for me that I would come no more and no less
Shegsiim ambassador to Mexico. So they told me after 40 years of mine
I was an active Komsomol member. I read newspapers and magazines and wrote 1111 0 11.11
subscription for all courses of the technical school. The last school winter was N I 'ir'nl traveling by train, and then by steamer to Mexico. I am her
filled with a huge craving for Moscow cultural life. I went111 n "no, pi1, Only when the train started, and my mother and the guys
I went to all the performances at the Meyerhold Theater1E, to the Hermitage14, to exhibitions.
- led, led some kind of force, I seemed to say goodbye to everyone. and ni and itzkisis, and I sat down, and the train picked up speed and soon disappeared
On one of the spring days, they call me to the teacher's room, where the phone is -II, n1 w I sat down, wiped my face, wet with tears, with a handkerchief and
one for the entire technical school. I'm runing. Khaya calls - “Tanya, come to us. 11. .11i mi a Seo life.
Your mother came with children. She is going to her father in Mexico. " I even spent the last 11 summer vacation in Vitebsk with my aunt
scared, but immediately drove off. Mom was in Moscow only I. 11 ii I I'tsls was small. We lived in a dacha near the city.
several days, but I remember them and remembered all my life. 11 I and 1n Ivel surrounded me with attention and care, and I rested
My mum! She was then about 50 years old, but looked old, 1 and deserted.
exhausted, dark-skinned, and the children were thin, and Dorochka was a limp school year. We were quickly released
on the eve of departure, she fell and broke her leg. They were dressed for activization15 and the country needed personnel for the village, and
old overcoats. Mom in a coat made of an overcoat dyed in black r 11 minutes agronomists. We tried to feed ourselves
color, the boys are just in greatcoats, only stitched a little p1'K, We understood that we would leave and many of us would not
sutured. Preparing my mother for departure Bronya is my cousin and i'1 got a ticket to the Mayakovsky Komsomol evening in
Leningrad. She put them on so that she would not be ashamed.
cried with pity and shame - yes, yes, shame.
42
 in public. Yai '1st Komsomol house. I remember a poorly lit hall
yu, "the stage, and the big, big, long Mayakovsky.
43
The hall was noisy, but he reads and reads.
 We, of course, do not understand much, and
noisy. Shouts - “We do not understand you. It stops and
speaks loudly - What don't you understand? A cloud in pants? It is necessary to read
carefully and understand! - Why do you travel abroad? - Is he
is silent and raises his head in a lot and speak quietly - Because - And he,
rebellious, looking for a storm, as if there is peace in the storm ”! I'm going home and
for some reason it's hard on my soul.
After a short time, his cold body lay in the writers' house
on the street Vorovskogo, next to whom we lived, and we walked him
look. For a long time there were newspapers in my bedside table with his
dying poems. "Everything is over! The love boat crashed o
everyday life. Comrade government - provide for my mother. " Everyone went
conversations, and more unwanted.
more fueled the desire to do something big. I went.
She told everything about her father, about her mother and about herself. Me carefully
listened and said that I would receive an answer. Were the last
preparations for the state. exams, repeated the material. Call to
break. I walk down the stairs and I see on the bulletin board
some fresh printed piece of paper - an ad. I read and that's it
whirled - “To Moetkov T.I., as an alien element, exclude
gokhnikum. Free the hostel. "
The girls came to the hostel and found me on my bed all in
slack. All were silent. One Xenia said - “You will sleep with me, not
cry and don't give up. "
) Life went on as usual, everyone left early in the morning for classes, and I
bagsh1a in Moscow. Hungry. Went to MOZO, MONO, MO, MOMI 22.
We went to the Polytechnic to listen to poets. I walked a day, a week, a month - they promised to sort it out everywhere and everywhere
Zharov1b, Bezymensky17 and Joseph Utkin18 with Lunacharsky19. “Harmony, refusal. Everywhere I left my tears. I didn't go to college anymore.
accordion - a dear side, poetry of the Soviet countryside>. - Zharov. I went late, when everyone was asleep, and got up when everyone was already
“Oh, Sun, stop, oh please, can't you see that you
the fiery heart of Ilyich stopped "- Bezymenskhiy. Sounded in my K'go advised me to go to the reception to Mikhail Ivanovich
in his ears - Party card - “Only one small one, one ticket is lost, 1 ip 1 below23? There was such a reception, where they registered and could
a gaping gap at the heart of the party. Do you hear the party? " Utkin -i i. i trust M.I. It was a hot summer. I'm exhausted and that's it and
so gentle, I read o the hat, o my fur seal, o the patches thatute cried. I didn't go to my family, I was ashamed, Malke didn't
put it on trousers and a vest. No, go. Ksenia fed me - she brought something from the dining room and
Lunacharsky is also standing before my eyes - fast, 'I iI' 'JTS' Lsisg.
temperamental and spoke of young poets with love. About poetry, oh! Some tall uncle told me. He wrote - surname, name,
our future life, about the happiness of being young. I walked home from where I come from. He wrote, wrote and says - You are my countrywoman, not
on foot (there was not a dime), or rode in a crowded tram, aPi11ga. MU. will help you. Do not Cry. Go, go, and pushed me in
poems rustled in my head. The whole life is ahead and it must be lived like this, n'r'ilil'l. I's study, where a beard bent at the writing table.
so as not to be ashamed .... N '"' yes and Issmolo came in and stood at the table, bowing her head, he read everything,
We were assigned. There was a contract, i.e. recruiting to distant'4111 Ugi the scammer wrote, then looked at me and said - “You
the edges. They gave out money and assigned them to shops where we could * At mppopats, but I wanted to go to Mexico, you’ll have enough work here too - that's
buy some good clothes. Me and Nina Lapinari i * u "work in Birobidzhan. Everything will be fine. What, your
contracted, and I bought a woolen dress with some kind of red 1m. are you out? You already know everything well. On! ”, And thrust me
bowknot, a nina blue crepe de Chine dress. We were preparing for Miygiu, tls bngo is written: "Rosalia Samuilovna Zemlyachka24.
exams.рн1В. pssgpnew. M.I. Kalinin ".
Thoughts swarmed in my head. And what if you go to the district committee and go to the hot avenue, ran to Red Square,
Komsomol20 and ask for underground work in Mexico? I1Ion {g and inik About narrow streets the NKRKI was located. Found it. Behind
Congress of the Comintern, I read page after page, and a tall gray-haired woman was sitting in the party town.
44
45

long skirt. I asked her - where is Zemlyachka, and she answered
reached out and took a piece of paper from me. Tell me nothing
had to. She took up the telephone receiver and told me to sit down.
I sat down on the edge of a chair and still did not believe that my torment was over.
I remembered her conversation with the technical school. She told them - Give her
a certificate, like everyone else, if she has good grades, immediately,
and let me know. She looked into my face and said -Go to your
technical school, there you will have everything. I didn't even say goodbye, I was running
where I was cursed, where I hated everything.
Everything was quiet around. Summer. Holidays. They all left. I'm standing
It was warm in Craiso's room, and we warmed up, rubbed
frostbitten cheeks and fingers and waited for the arrival of employees and
bosses. Our travel certificate was from
People's Commissariat of Agriculture of the USSR. Divided lengthwise into 3 parts,
it certified that I, Mostkova T.I., was on a mission to
order of Khabarovsk Kraiso for permanent work
agronomist for vegetable growing. One part - the spine was left for me
i; dent, one was sewn to the case in the HR department and another was sent
'place of future work.

I {ac all three were sent to Birobidzhan district, but for now
y teacher's room door and I'm afraid to open it. Suddenly the door flew open, iii, they shoved the director of the state farm Finkelstein to Pokrovka, so that he
and our head teacher, with a happy smile, pulls me, and shakes my hand, and he accepted. Pokrovka station is the first station from Khabarovsk to
congratulates, and shoves me a certificate that I graduated in 1930 eaiid. A state farm was organized there, and his friend Efim cMoscow gardening technical school. We already found Timiryazev as a young man there, appointed agronomist of the state farm. We are
Not remembering myself, I am flying to OZET25 - I am going to Birobidzhan. There, in practice. They fed us hearty in the dining room, taught
OZETE, I feel happy - a lot of people are going, r i Mon, riding a horse, we watched the seeds being prepared for sowing.
specialists, and even more so from Moscow, say that there will be 1chpi, Glstein was a kind person, small in stature and even
republic, but so far only a district, immediately draw up documents, give'11igo shy, undetected. We immediately fell in love with him and
some money, invite to a meeting led by! NU11 or. Nude young wife beautiful Galya charmed us all. Us
Smidovich, Kalinin's deputy. Ii the neighbors aired - he left his wife and son and married her,
I'm going to Birobidzhan. My fees were short-lived. His own.ch gn still a girl, the daughter of her mistress in the Crimean state farm, where
money received as a "contract". those. advance payment, I "o piiiiraa" or work as an agronomist.
straightened out in an instant. We were assigned a special store where I
bought myself a purple silk dress with a colorful bow and
something. Three people were traveling from our technical school - Efim Breiter, Rivp
Magidina and me. Yefim managed to marry our fellow practitioner, but the course
younger, and she gathered with him and left before us. I am with Magidina •
kind fat girl, went later, rode in a carriage with young
guys for 10 days, it was cold in the car, hard on a wooden
shelf, but fun.

We arrived in Khabarovsk on February 12, 1931, early in the morning. (`` goyal
bitter frost. Our direction was to Khabarovsk Kri yul '
Transport has not yet gone, and we, with our light load, were
on foot. On the way we were stopped by women and from the fate
helped to rub the cheeks, because they were blazing from the frost - we
managed to freeze. All our clothes, especially our shoes,
corresponded to the Far East February frost

46

in'ilam y Malky, Faivel n Nachman's grandfather. Vitebsk, 1931

47

The department manager, powerful, took over our patronage
a gray-haired man, very handsome, who was once
manager of the landowner in the west, and now he went to build a new
the republic of the Jews in the Far East. We were dressed in cotton suits
- quilted wadded trousers tucked into felt boots and quilted
sweatshirts. The material is plain, dark cotton - to us
it seemed that the suit suits us, and most importantly, it was comfortable and warm.
And so the steward teaches me to saddle a horse, firmly in his hands
close to him. We flung open the heavy, wooden door, entered
the front hall, and in front of us on the straw lay the owner of the house,
killed by a felled tree in the forest. His wife stood on either side and
small children. I did not have to sleep that night.

In the morning I went out into the yard. The frost was 20-25 degrees, but
The sun shone brightly and warmed so that the cold caressed more,
than freezing. Caked and sparkling snow creaked underfoot,
ii it was possible to look in it like in a mirror. It was easy in my soul.
hold the bridle, bridle the horse and quickly jump to sit downIt the resettlement department told me that the horses from Waldheim
on horseback. You feel like the master of the situation, with pride of services at 4 o'clock in the afternoon, and so that you do not miss them. Will be waiting for me
you guide the fast horse wherever you want and you are not afraid of the fast chairman of the collective farm Misha Shkolnik.
ride, no gallop. Already breathtaking from the ride. With pride And now I am going to work as an agronomist in the collective farm "Waldheim",
you go down and give the ends of the bridle to the manager, and in return you replace the urban vegetable-growing farm, which has
you get praise - “You will be an agronomist, you’re not afraid, and n pilu, greenhouses, a small area of ​​newly developed lands under
well done". We stroked the first tractors and warriors with tenderness. The collective farm has been living for 2 years and 2 Chinese
The "Internationale", who arrived at the state farm, sat down next to the midwife, Volodya - old, dry, and Misha - young, slender
tractor driver, and even tried to turn on the speed, or even start "Ivipian, I will be an agronomist, that is, I will lead them, but in fact
tractor. For the latter, it was necessary to have sufficient physical u • itching to learn a craft, business - I will master the richest
the force accumulated by the local residents of these places - the Chinese with their
The days in Pokhrovka flew by quickly. Riva left to start Vegetable Cultivation.
navigating the first steamer to the Amur Region as an agronomist I will work with people, mainly former shtetl and
collective farm. And I took the train back to the west to Tikhonkaya station, in 12ip1ri4k yyi, who came here to live, work, have their own
km. from which there was a new Jewish resettlement stick; x1 Piece of bread, raise children. People have experienced a lot on their
Waldheim 7, where I was sent. We arrived at the station 1c K and were forced to come here to start a new life.
Quiet already at night. We are passengers traveling by a local train!) ProIvykshis to the hard, physical labor of a peasant and
to this station. On the way, which lasted 3-4 hours, allNN1Nh1M 'TM1KSLyIm climatic conditions.
met. Where should I sleep, where should I go? Even takigo
there was no question. Stolov sat down beside me - chief
resettlement department and said - I live y local residents,
forester, there will be a place for you too, and tomorrow you will go to school 1
collective farm "Waldheim".

I remember how we went out on a deserted little stappio,
which, probably, not in vain was called "Quiet". Was tSmpra
frosty February night. I followed Stolov, n m1
came to the high porch, where the crowd was crowded. The windows were prkch
illuminated. Stolov got worried. He lived here without a family yet (oh
still he came from Minsk), but he has already mastered here and the weight
