Foreword

Although my name is on the cover, I am not the author of this book.
It consists entirely of the memories of my mother, Tatiana
(Taiba) Izrailevna Mostkova, written in the period 1976 - 1980
biennium, her personal letter to Boris P, where she talks about her biography and
life of my father, Baskin Joseph Moiseevich, and several
oral stories recorded with her words by my father. About meeting c
relatives 40 years later in Mexico and the United States, my mother told in letters
from there.

I also considered it possible after my mother told about my father's life
attach to the book the original of his statement to the Attorney General
USSR, written in December 1939 and documents about it
release from exile, re-examination of the case and rehabilitation. Father
also left memories of his life, some of them were published in
Russia and Israel in Russian, and some are still waiting for their
researchers.

Mom's manuscripts were kept by my brother, on their basis he wrote
the book "The Branch of a Tree" published in Israel is also in Russian.
After my brother's death, I reread my mother's manuscripts again and realized
what is best about yourself, your life and family, about the life of people at that
hard time, only she herself can tell, her living memory, and
I publish her notes, without touching anything but rare grammatical
and stylistic mistakes. I'm glad I was able to publish it in Israel for
Russian and hope that someday my grandchildren or great-grandchildren
can translate it into other languages, I hope that it will
interesting to an Israeli or American reader.
I think that if my mother was still alive, and she published
her memories, she dedicated 6y them to her mother Shifra
Mostkova, and in her face to all Jewish mothers.
I, for my part, dedicate her to the blessed memory of my family,
killed in 1942 in the Braslav geggo.

Remembering childhood
memories are shared by the trait - before the fire and
the second was probably during the years of the revolution, i.e. before
few impressions. Wake up early
Darkness, and a frosted lamp on the wall
decent, quite rich furniture. it
but probably the house in which I am 7-8 years old
Sdiao the bedroom door is half closed, dad is standing
M peeps through the gap. There, in the wide bedroom
+ ‚Foaati, all in white, my mother is lying. She is giving birth. Y ce
U. dirpdia, good-natured Keila (Clara), so me
0У 9МЧJш, and maybe Rose. Which of my brothers is mom
just assume - Mikhail, born in 1917,
it was in 1917 and I was 6 years old.
beaten, kyuuchno. wooden, houses were often, and she,
ir. e 99My d near future. Before me, for 3 years
earlier, T. Styrian brother Abram, and my whole family
created by laob, 1., d 1907 - 1908. Everyone else is mine
remembering aIIa oTMoretsp y, ks to later years. So, I remember
Polish occupation, I 11'ibsJiJip in school - in the first grade, and
remembered that the pen was peg. I obszh lup 'back home and right there
came back. 1 [ohmio, How ssggchpe • chalk ostopdoped patrol and returned
home, and we all went nowhere, sat in our house, in
their own yard - all the neighbors were at the gate, and they were waiting ... for someone
will come and demand something. Everyone added up and kept the money at
yourself to pay off. It was already in another house, on another
to the side of Sadovaya Street, y the owner Wolfson in the yard, in the outhouse,
next to a large cement washroom. In a large main house he lived
ho'zayi n himself, who was soon ousted (moved to 3
Mrmip i 1. 1 1 'nt • ,,. I, n occupied the house by customs. It was all through
1 'junkio pgi, silt ,, n, kpe fire. I remember the whole burnt down street
R1iaLI Mir1111100.i n py y`y1, ruins. In them we played
1111 M1 II, 11iMip0. n1 1 ° i ni go ii, and 011W imm served as a refuge in
nn1 principle, nnn% iiiu II I, I and 1 we lived until 1928 -29.
ozsudp us) 'plzi II' I 111 1 $ I Lip1m, pImi with children About this period
I remember my life more and I want to write from my
impressions of my ancestors, mostly heard.
So, we live in the courtyard of the Wolfson house. Front house
large, 6 - 8 large windows, with a front stone porch.
Next to us is the newly rebuilt synagogue on the corner, fenced
wooden fence, and a small street, also burnt down, with access to
bazaar. Along this street, retreating quite a bit - 20-40 meters,
the quiet river Sluch flows - the place of our childish relaxation. we are here
swam, more than once or twice a day, rinsed linen here, washed dishes,
cleaned the pots and wade, climbed for water lilies and
went on dates at night.

In the back of the courtyard stood an old house, divided into two
half with a common porch and hallway. The door is a slag to us, a
to the right to our neighbors - the elderly. Opened the door, we went into
large kitchen with chipped floor, which was very
unpleasant to wash. In the front corner of the kitchen was a huge
a Russian stove that heated almost the entire house and served mom for
cooking. There was a chicken coop under the stove. Window in
the courtyard was opposite the stove. Right behind the stove was a small
room 10-12m2, nursery or hen party. I and mine lived there
cousins ​​Masha and Nina, whom my mother took in
after the death of their mother in Saratov from tuberculosis. Their dad Bunin
Isaac brought him to his family, he himself wanted to get a job and earn a living.
It so happened that he went to Minsk for the goods, and an expensive train
bandits overtook, robbed, tied to a tree and burned. These ones
the girls stayed with us.

To the left of the entrance was a hall and a small bedroom. All
the atmosphere was already more than poor, but the hall was preserved from
old apartment mirror with beautiful legs and a chest of drawers with
with secret drawers and convertible top. That's all that's left of
past well-being and, according to my mother, all this was collected by my
to parents from the rich house of mother's relatives - Pole, who
probably left - fled to Moscow, Leningrad or even abroad.
Mom didn't know exactly where they had gone. But there were rich people Pole
- by the surname from which my impoverished grandmother descended
Pesya Polyak, who married a poor guy, but very
intelligent and scientist and, as they said then, economic,
I

Z

those. venerable, with confidence, Nahmani Noruhilmai, gave him 11
children, of whom two survived to old age. i iomiiio like my father
I was hiding in the ruins of a conflagration, from whom I don’t know.
Probably from mobilization. He was starving - making his own stomach.
Many were chopping off their fingers. I remember how it was already burning during the revolution
city, our haberdashery shop was burning - property and all
the state of my parents, the bazaar was burning and we children were sitting with a neighbor
y windows and watched the flame and cried that there was still no mother
with dad.

In these distant childhood years, our
Haya's grandmother. They were a small, quiet, very old woman.
I remember her wealth - a small, forged chest, and in it
multicolored balls of thread. She knitted and the thread was always woven
somewhere on the floor, and our Siberian cat, fluffy, kept striving for him
roll away to play enough. This grandmother is a mother
my father Isrol Mostkov. She lived all her life in
a distant village-place somewhere on the border with Poland, near
Unfinished. I don't even remember her voice, she was so powerless
and silent. This woman gave birth and raised, or they themselves
grown up, many children. I knew her youngest son, my father,
who was born in 1880, heard about Taiba's eldest daughter, son
Motle, daughter of Ginde, the youngest son of Eiser, and more. Their house
stood near the bridge and therefore, according to legend, the name went Mostkov.
What did her husband, my grandfather Leiba, I do not know, and there is no one
ask. He was a poor man - I know this for sure, and growing up
the youth left for America.

This was around the end of the last century. The elders left
brothers and with them my 15-year-old future dad. They got into
Mississippi, and were poor, doing petty trade and handicrafts,
a uncles were doing something y the owner. They were pedlers
peddlers, with a sack draped over their shoulders, they carried every
small goods, mainly haberdashery. When we children were growing up and
asked to eat in those hungry 20s, dad told us: “Here in
We did not ask America to eat, but the owner told us - look at
sausage and eat bread, drink cold water and lean against
hot stove - you will have American-style tea. It should be so. " About me
4
neighbors said: “A wonderful girl - she plays all day and
he doesn't even ask for food. "


*****



Mom's manuscript
Thus, my father went through the first school of life.
tempering in America. When he grew up and began to get married, he got bored
in a distant home, or maybe he didn't find a bride for himself, but he already
was over 25 years old when he returned to Russia and became my fiancé, already
a little outdated, 27-year-old mother-to-be. But about mom later.
My dad was by nature a kind person, flexible, but America
deposited in him by stinginess - thrift, rudeness, selfishness
and, of course, lack of literacy and intelligence. I remember what
five
he was neat. Suit and hat (new at the time) always
hanging in the closet, as expected, boots (and in the most difficult time
life there were several pairs) shone and my face was reflected in them.
The hard collars turned white and changed. He was red-haired, slightly
freckled, fluffy, blue-eyed. This is how he appeared
in front of my mom in 1907.

My mother is Shifra Nakhmanovna Borukhovich. About her father, my
grandfather, to whom I was most attached, I already wrote.
Tall, slender, hunchbacked, dark-haired, good-natured - lived
near the town of Slutsk in settlements - Ostrov. My grandmother Pesya was a noble
kind, but impoverished, and she was married to a poor but learned guy.
Grandfather Nachman and his brother (Ynta Moiseevna's father) studied at the cheder
and then in the yeshiva - this is a higher religious school. Grandpa had and
general education above average, was by nature
cultured and charming person, respected by all in business
circles and the synagogue. They trusted grandfather, went for advice, went
to borrow and borrowed.

Grandma Pesa was given a legacy of a fabric shop, in which she
lasted very little due to poor health. By
stories grandmother Pesya gave birth to 11 children, of whom I knew
three - my mother, the eldest and beloved daughter Shifra, and the younger
Malku and Mikhail. The other children were spoken of in whispers. One
the guy was mentally weak and left home, they spoke at sea, and did not
returned. The rest of the children died in childhood from various diseases. I AM
I remember my grandmother was already sick. She died of kidney disease. Lay in
bed weak and, calling me, asked - has the ice already gone? (this is
spring was coming), I ran to watch the ice and, excited,
ran, hurrying to answer - yes, the ice is coming. Grandma sighed
said - here I will die soon. I remember even earlier - she still walked,
took my hand and took me to the shop of her friends, where she bought
cuts me for a few dresses for school. I remember the plaid dress.
So it was at my 6-7 years old. I went in these dresses
first time to school. I didn’t make a reservation, I immediately wore dresses to school -
one after another, so it seemed to me better to show myself, and besides
there was nobody.

So, my grandfather's eldest daughter was economic, smart
and, due to the illness of her mother and large children, she ran the household and
b
grandfather's affairs. Grandpa was a specialist in fur and other
agricultural raw materials. I remember that in his apartment there is always
there were bunches of dried mushrooms that smelled delicious. Him
brought processed animal skins, and he smoothed them,
evaluated and, never deceiving, said the true value. His
the word was law. Later, in the 20s, he was one of the first former owners
and small traders were hired by the Soviet customs ..
a specialist with payment of 25 rubles a month, was a member of a trade union,
which was very honorable.

My mom was smart and businesslike. They said that they
once a house caught fire, and valuable skins lay in the closet.
Grandpa jumped up at night, was confused and began to pray to God. My mum
in one nightgown - already a bride, she opened the window and
threw away all the goods, i.e. saved the grandfather and all his fortune. O6
this has been told many times and on other occasions. My education
mom didn’t receive was the eldest in the family and bore all the hardships
household. Drew my mother into politics, into public
a life. She participated in mutual assistance, was friends with the poor and
impoverished people, collected help for them, and helped
everything I could.

So, she was friends with Chaya Rabinovich. Her husband was very
educated, but sick and hunchbacked person, and this poor
the woman alone was forced to feed all her numerous,
a gifted and poor family. Mom helped them all the time, and in her
hard years helped through people, i.e. collected for them
donations. My mother was not a member of the Bund 1, but she was
close to them and close to the revolutionary movement. Why such
is a pretty and smart woman sitting up in girls? It happens. Was
she was a man who loved her very much, but he was a shoemaker and not a match for her -
prestige. Then it was very important - to take below your class
parents did not allow. When mom first met dad
she was attracted by his dashing look, composure, but his American
the character also did not leave her gaze. But it's time to create
family and they got married. Mom was given a little dowry -
a grocery store with ties, buttons, ribbons that
boxes were not only in the shop, but also at home under the bed. We,
7
the children who soon appeared played with this haberdashery, but give
she could not livelihood.

What do I remember? I wake up at night and hear my mother cry. Came out
barefoot in the hall, and there y a hot stove - dad, mom and
father's nephew is already a young man of 17-18 years old Tsukovich Israel,
the son of an older sister. Mom, in burning tears, tells him that
dad does not give her money for life and she has nothing to feed her children, and they already
then there were four and soon a fifth appeared. I remember how dad
frozen, came home in the evening displeased, gloomy, alone
dined and carefully cut off the crusts of white sieve with a sharp knife
bread, and we, a flock of half-starved animals, sat in the distance and watched him
in the mouth. Then he began to count the proceeds and put everything back together and
hid. Brothers, younger than me by 3 and 6 years, grew up weak c
round bellies from the excess Bulba they ate.
They sat down for cast iron potatoes, large, crumbly (now would not
refused such), and a glass of cucumber pickle and swallowed with
relish. Lsva was called that - potato. We were dressed somewhat
as. Since early spring, they walked barefoot, their feet were on tiptoe. clothing
went from senior to junior. I don't remember that we ate our fill
sour cream, eggs, even milk. I remember potatoes. They took school with them
apple or pear. It was the cheapest.

We also had happy days. Spring, April. Easter is coming soon. All
fuss. Winter frames are exposed and taken to the attic. My
duty - to wash the frames, wash the glasses with soap and then thoroughly
remove. Hanging lamp above the large dining table in the hall
metal, which I wrap with green tissue paper.
All kitchen utensils are thoroughly cleaned to a copper sheen,
whiteness, and then fried over a fire. After all, everything is needed for Easter
everything is new, sterile. Down with bread, cereals, everything should be
Easter - matzo, matzo, special wine, meat, chickens,
Easter fat. Old dishes are taken to the pantry, to the attic, all
the apartment is washed, painted, swept out and new, fresh is brought in,
specially Easter. All that is possible, we children, dragged to the river -
there is sand and it is free to wash and clean everything. Does laundry
mom, sometimes even invites the washerwoman. All white linen is boiling
rinses on the river, starch, and then is not swallowed with an iron,
a trolley until shine, soft and smooth. It's Easter.
8
But there are also Saturdays - holidays. Cleaning is in progress and
training. Even on Thursday evening, mom peels a lot of carrots, rubs
her on a grater and prepares a huge clay pot, entwined
wire. This is tsimes. A kugel is laid in carrots (flour
dressing - dough with a fat piece of meat). In another pot, too
bucket, cooked compote from dried fruits, mainly from apples
pears. Chicken is slaughtered on Saturday. This is also our job. I carry her to
butcher for a couple of cents. Somewhere on the next street in a small
he lives in the house. A butcher comes out, a thin man in a black yarmulke and
in a black long jacket, as all devout Jews go, takes y