me a chicken by the withers and, goes a little into the garden. Bares the bottom
neck, pinches off a little feathers and chicks the neck. I close
eyes, the chicken beats, flutters, and then calms down, I take her by the legs
and drag it home. Then my job is to pluck it. I'm going to the barn
I put a kerchief on my shaggy head, sometimes an apron, and
I begin to pinch from the legs. Then the wings, and the most difficult of all the head.
The work is not pleasant, but necessary. I especially had a lot of them
pluck y grandfather when I lived alone with him after death
Pesya's grandmother.

Sometimes meat was cooked instead of chicken - lean beef. But
should have had a chicken by Saturday, and my mom tried. Friday
mom got up very early, lit up the Russian stove and put it there
pot with chicken, carrots and onions. It was broth and stewed
potatoes with prunes. It was called a golit, then it was put
pot of carrots - cimes, compote and black coffee (not real, a
surrogate). By the time we got up, mom had already managed the stove
went to work, help my dad in the shop, and I was ordered to wash
floors, they were once painted, but already wiped. Work
there were many. I washed the first rooms calmly, but when the turn
I reached the big kitchen, I, already tired, began to phony.
I missed corners, wiped poorly. The boys wanted to eat too
grab something, and I whipped them with a wet rag on my bare feet
legs. Sometimes this struggle and washing dragged on until the arrival of dad c
mom, and then I got it.

All day on Friday, we didn't really eat anything, only carried
pieces. But on Friday night, when the sun went down and began
long-awaited Saturday, we came to life. It was necessary by this time and
nine
go to the bathhouse or at home to bathe, clean shoes and clothes.
The main work was done by my neat and active mom, and dads
were afraid.

So, a festive dinner. At a long table laid on top
ordinary oilcloth with a white tablecloth, appliances are arranged,
small plates for herring or chicken liver pâté.
All clean, meek, hungry are waiting. Mom shares the chicken and
says “Chicken leg to men - dad and elder brother.
The family is on them, all our well-being. Wings for girls
they will grow up and fly away from us. "-" Mom, you gave everything away, but for yourself
left nothing "-" No, my dears, I have an ass -
I've had enough. "

We go to bed well fed, fed up, redeemed, and mom is still something
does not hear her. In the morning we wake up - every y bed
clean clothes are prepared, even shoes are all cleaned, and in winter even
everything is heated in the oven. In the morning they take their time, they ceremoniously go out into the hall, on
on the table there are extinguished candles that burned and burned out yesterday (their
you cannot extinguish), and my mother, covering her face with her palms, prayed for them.
In the morning, a pot of coffee is pulled out of the stove, we drink it,
snacking on my mom's baked goods early Friday morning. Stand in
buffet and kalas, which my mother also baked for Saturday. Everybody goes to
synagogue to pray. Everything in everything festive. We children go there too
we drop in, and more run around the courtyard of the synagogue-school. At lunch we
eat golit - hot brown stewed potatoes, put
broth, tsimes and drink compote.

Dad sleeps during the day. The shutters close, everybody walks on tiptoe
you can't make noise - dad is sleeping. Everything for Saturday. For this, all
week to malnourish, deny yourself a lot. But Saturday is holy
saints. And you wait for this Saturday, starting from Sunday. Saturday
you can't! - turn on the light, put it out, work, count money,
buy and sell - you can rest, eat, drink, sleep. Not bad.
I haven't told everything about Easter yet. Easter is the main holiday
spring, when a week's rest, cleanliness, satiety, pleasure.
Passover symbol is the liberation of Jews from captivity. Victory, it seems.
I have already written about the preparation for Easter. Matzah is eaten instead of bread. White
thin, but it was not and they ate thick, black, homemade, but matzah
and only matzo. It was used to make dumplings, cereals, flour with eggs. Our
ten
matzo was placed in baskets lined with white sheets in our
girl's room, leg-koge, in the corner, in the hope that the girls
will not indulge. But we indulged at nights - quietly under
blanket gnawed on matzo, I must confess.

They prepared a special Easter wine and treated it to an angel -
alio-ganova, who came as if that night. The youngest son was looking for
hidden matzah under the pillow near the father. They sang songs, asked
and in songs they answered in chorus. We went to pray daily and walked in
sunny April days. Forget about all the troubles, There were
holidays with fasting. I remember this feeling. "I will fast all
day. "- You're still small, half a day is enough for you. -" No, all day. "
- and I'm proud. So, on Friday they ate tightly for the last time, but
the whole Saturday is long and hungry. Waitin saturday
in the evening of the appearance of the stars - when it will be already possible to cook dinner.
Now you can. No time to peel potatoes. Mom washes the whole
puts it in a cast iron, floods the stove with birch wood, and behold
the iron pot is already boiling. The herring is being cleaned. I have a tail, but I have a head.
Daddy's middle. Whoever fasted - the first to sit at the table, and how delicious
potatoes with herring, how happy I passed the test together
with all the adults, fasted to the end.

All these are the holidays that are remembered - imprinted in connection with
joys, gustatory impressions. But let's remember o
everyday life, and there were a lot of them up to my 16 years old, when I
got on the train Slutsk - Moscow with a change, it seems, in Osipovichi,
Minsk and, it seems, Smolensk and came to the cobblestone - Belorussky
railway station - Moscow with a large wicker basket (we don't have
were found), in which my 2-W print dresses, winter
patched coat and even, it seems, a downy pillow or even
feather bed. Everything that my mother could give me. There was also a plywood trunk c
provisions. In a pocket sewn into linen, there were 25 rubles (capital
pretty solid and the only one that was y me later
during all the years of study and even work, my grandfather gave it to me).
Let's remember everyday life.

Dysentery. A girl named Dweira-Dora, a niece, came to us
my father. Mom was very, very kind and pitied everyone. Some kind of y
they had a misfortune at home, maybe she was left an orphan and her
sent to us. She was beautiful and stately, but I was 10 years old, and we
eleven
gnawed apples the size of a nut - just tied up, and there were
abundance - around the gardens are homeless because of the fire. I only remember that
I was sent to the pharmacy for medicine, and I was embarrassed to open the door,
sat on the street and did not dare to knock and open the door of the pharmacy - there
worked as a visualizer my uncle (my mother's cousin Haim
Yudya). I sat there. Then she ran home and lied that she was, that
there was no medicine, but they told me - no longer needed! I didn't understand right away and
I was even glad that it was not necessary. Looking at my gloomy face
Mom, I get it. Dweira was lying in the bedroom, already dead. From
dysentery she died. I remember that my mother tore her hair, she
she was also pregnant. We children were severely punished
do not pick or eat apples. In August 1921, my mother gave birth
daughter and she was named Dweira (Dora).

For water. We were not close to the well, they took water for all matters from
rivers. Mom sent us children for water to drink in good,
a deep well with a crane in the yard of a rich man (probably
he was paid for it). It was a little distant. I had to go
obliquely through the burnt, overgrown with tall grass former
street, past the ashes and ruins, around which they continued to grow and
bloom apples and wonderful Slutsk pears. It was not for us
very pleasant and we bargained - who to go, and often
were taking time off. Yet I remember the pleasure of this event.
A long pole was fitted to carry two buckets of water or
even 2 poles with good hewn handles. We go there for water
ran, jumping on poles, clanking buckets. Tried to go
company. The name of the neighboring guys - let's go with us for water. And they walked.
The crane in the well was going well and quickly, and the tub was full
bubbly, cold, tasty water. We are as happy as horses
poured, sighed and drank again (you can't indulge in the well
It was). Then they poured in small buckets. In the middle of the bucket ears
poles were threaded and carried out of the yard as immeasurable value.
They balanced, and in pairs walked along the deep, fluffy grass, along
trampled path, barefoot, straining its growing
young strength, feeling its tense muscle strength.
Boys, girls, all rejoiced together, laughed at work
NND $ mogo, necessary and pleasant. We stopped twice
M b and trgeu sprawled and looked up, shutting his eyes
12
and inhaling the aroma of fresh air, fresh green grass. Such
happiness was felt when the young body was in close contact with
wet, fresh-smelling grass. The grass grew there -
natural clover or, as we said, a stable. we
climbed and ran into the runs, tore chamomiles - large, full and
counted out - loves, does not love, spits, kisses, presses to the heart,
send to hell. Joy knew no bounds.

Our shore. The river Sluch crossed our sweet city of Slutsk
in half. They said I live across the river. Sadovaya street went like a beam to
river, and since our house was at the end, we had only
pass only the synagogue and cross a narrow, dusty road and
we are on the river. The shore was soft, sandy, trampled. On both
farther to the sides were wonderful thickets of water lilies and we, not
fearing the depths, they plucked flowers on long stems into wreaths. Coast
served us not only for swimming, for pleasure. we are here
learned to work - something that you can't learn in any workshop
Washing little things - it was our business all summer, and even in winter we went
rinse into a breakdown, without fear of cold and wind. Washed out everything
only in the hands and eyes climbed. The laundry was not dirty, we
carried away to the river. Washing was combined with bathing, i.e. we are dirty
soaped and left in the sun to reach, and then
rinsed thoroughly. You used to take some thing and
you will swim with her to a depth where it is better to swim. There were also losses. Y
I was even in trouble, quite a big one. Came from
Moscow's aunt Malka, she studied at the Krupskaya Academy. it
it was, however, already in 1925, when I was 14 years old. She arrived in
very nice dark marquise dress with white lace
collar and the same cuffs. She took off her good
Dress, a collar and cuff tore off for washing. I, without asking,
I took them as I was going to swim and wanted to surprise her.
Imagine that I lost one of my cuffs in the river.
I could not admit, I said that I brought everything - at home
lost, but I still remember how I suffered.
We cleaned dishes on the river. Sand, sand, handles,
Every speck was removed. And then it was rinsed and dried.
as a lady we carried a mountain of metal, a bundle of linen. Yes, they dried the clothes
they even spread the linen over the green grass and it is in the sun
13
bleached. We bathed the kids. The older girls drove
snotty, zakakanyh and all sorts of brothers and sisters, seated them in
water on the sand and scrubbed to white, and they both cried and laughed, but
always tied in with the elders. We swam until blue in the face, for hours
did not get out of the water. We went to teach lessons on the river and hid
from mom in case of trouble or leprosy, too, on the river. When I went to
to my companion Perle Rabinovich, I did not walk around across the bridge, but
took off her pants (or we went without pants at all), lifted
dress above the navel, covering the edge with its muzzle and crossing the river
wade. On this river, both adults wore linen to rinse, and water
carried for all other needs, and watered cows and horses, etc. River
was the second home.
There have been rivers and wars. Two teams of guys from both sides of the river
fought with wooden guns, cried and even were struck
and winners. We were afraid of these battles, and my mother did not let the brothers,
and they were also small. The young ladies from Troygai swam in the river,
suburb of the city. Beautiful, burly girls. Stood next to
the military unit and about the girls told badly. I go to them
swam, but did not meet. Those were the years when the book came out
Veresaeva "Behind a Closed Door", and in my head were already swarming
mature thoughts. Something itched at me, and I decided that I was sick
a bad disease from bathing with these girls. I endured for a long time, a
then she confessed to my mother and we went to the doctor. She examined me and
said "you read what you shouldn't."
A family. I would like to describe our life in my 10-13 years in my family
parents, since then the family broke up, my father left, and he took me to
my grandfather. So, my mother in August 1921 gave birth to the most
the youngest is the girl Dweir-Dor. The time was slow. Our
the haberdashery shop burned down, and in general the small seller is my father, and
already poor, ceased to exist. A must live, children ask
eat. I don't know what they were doing, I know that everything was unsuccessful.
We bought a cow, hornless, hornless, she ran away from the herd, and we
looking, always looking. So that we drink enough milk, this is not me
I remember. I remember my mother's very sad face darkened in her 40s
patio. She combed her hair hastily near the mirror - dressing table, and I
Mpdaornulae. She stroked my head and said: "so that you
Jts1ChKa lived better than me. "She tried to sew something for
fourteen
people, someone to serve, helping people. We did not see oil at all.
Once I got into the house of a rich merchant and saw butter on the table,
I was very surprised and I still remember how the stories told my mother o
seen.
They bought sieve bread for my father, and he cut off the crusts, and we watched
in his mouth and drooling. We bought potatoes in the village, in the summer
ate rotten thickets, very tasty. We have still bypassed the road;
a The Rabinovichs were starving and the children were released into the people, the elder Khan and
Sarochka. We went to school with Polina, there are not many of us
fed.
And at such a difficult time, my mother gave birth to a daughter and milk y
it stagnated - there was a breast. I remember a 10 year old like my mom
already a middle-aged woman, it was hard as she moaned, and I said -
"Mom, come on me." She lay down to her and sucked her mother's mouth
and spat out her chest, so gradually she moved away.
Bertochka, the Wolfson's youngest daughter, ran into the yard with
with a frying pan on which a layer as thin as tissue paper,
lay an omelet. It was an unheard of luxury for us.
Mom was busy with some kind of work outside the house and I, already a schoolgirl,
had to look after the child, rocked in a cradle - a stroller,
wicker. Girlfriend girls beckoned to the street, I couldn't
wait until my sister falls asleep and leaned on the swinging legs,
faster, faster, let him fall asleep, and then the rocking chair tilted and
turned over. The girl fell out and burst into tears. I was scared. Glory
God was all right, safe and sound.
This bedroom had a large wardrobe, and I loved
pull out mom's clothes and dress up. These are hungry and
cold years (there was little firewood, the house was old and we always
were freezing and warming themselves on the Dutch stove, wiping it with their backs and climbing into
oven), I pulled out a long black silk skirt and
Sweetheart White Black Polka Dot Curvy Mom's Wedding
blouse and wrapped everything on herself. Mom sometimes found me in
) TOM robes and her gloomy, sunken face expressed regret o
unfulfilled dreams. I remember my dad as thin as well,
mrpchy and even angry and nervous towards us guys. Well, a
we - in the summer we ran around the yard, along the street, to the river, to the guys, and in the winter,
poorly dressed, lounged at home in the hall. We were running around
15
a large long table, hiding behind its curly legs,
clung to each other, sometimes fought, piled up in a heap and again
they ran until they got a snitch and, crying, everyone started anew.
On one of the sunny days of the end of August, guests came to us -
Aunt Malka and her younger brother Mikhail who came from Moscow,
who studied in Leningrad at a medical institute and, without
consent of his parents and all relatives, suddenly married Haya
Pastron, a lively girl and as they said around - not for him (mother
Genie). Malka brought me a piece of chintz with brown stains,
immediately laid it out on the table, cut out the neck, kimono sleeves and
said - sew it yourself, take a needle and thread and sew carefully, a
make a round collar with a lapel. This was my first
independent work and taking care of my creative life - mine
Mom had no time to teach me, she had to earn a living.
Our neighbors in the house were elderly people - in one
an old bachelor lived in a small room, in another an elderly couple. And this one
the couple broke up, suddenly her husband died, and we all
participated in the funeral. According to Jewish laws, it was impossible
a lonely woman to live with a lonely man, and me
settled with this woman as an intermediary. I slept on a hard couch
and my mother made a bed for me with her clean one - everything is as it should be. Like me
got scared when a few days later I combed and while I endured
not understanding the reason for this. When everyone was asleep early in the morning and I
looked at the armpit, then terribly frightened. We crawled lazily into
the seams are huge white fat lice. I burst into tears and I'm not there anymore
spent the night. Now we do not know what lice are, but I remember them, and do not
time. Were then still sewn in 1933 in the Khabarovsk hospital, where I
lay sick with typhoid fever, they were in 1943 - hunger,
it's nothing you can do. I defended my three children as much as I could -
actively fought lice, but they were remembered, probably very
bored and frightened.
The first school years were hardly remembered. I went to school early
n n ') and' mu something not in the kindergarten (as it should), but in
n's bit Aunt Malka. I sat on the last row, and that's all