soft. Fall on her, arms outstretched, and she closes you o
sun. Sleep. Sleep sweetly, sweetly. I remember Uncle David's house
aunt Lipke. They processed animal skins and they had
warehouses are cool and damp. They lived on Bolotnaya Street and masonry
whistled as we walked towards them. I remember the departure of their daughter Lyuba
Poland, was a beauty (this is Hanele's mother from New York).
Y my parents had 5 children.
34
35
Moscow
1926-1930-1931gg
Everything is like a dream. Farewell, farewell, farewell. The main thing is the order -
be sure to take a cab at the station, and this was separately
postponed a trifle 'Address - Bolshaya Pirogovskaya 2a. Half empty
wagon, wooden shelf, and me with a huge, but soft wicker
a basket in one hand and a grocery bag in the other. Swung
and the memory of her remained for me all my life. By the way, all my life
lucky for good people. The next day she took me with her
to the center and we got on the bus. These were small buses c
spring seats. I sat down and fell through and laughed out loud.
Everyone turned around, and I said - "you sit and drive!"
I remember Moscow in 1926. Yeseninschina. B the bus got a man
and the woman is naked. They talked a lot about suicide. Okhotny Ryad -
reads, where everyone hunted. We bought 2 bags of charcoal,
and it started, went, then everything ran, and I'm on my way. For the first time in "m we were heated and cooked. We went to the museum of fine
a long journey, even to Moscow, and one and for a long time, and maybe even arts. Then I began to walk myself to Zubovskaya Square,
forever and ever. I traveled by train several times to see my aunt Etl (mother Kropotkinskaya street through Petrovka, to the Myasnitsky gate. There,
Reznik Soap and Ani) to the station Urechye, which is 20-30 km. from us, but 1, iChistye ponds, lived the Pastrons. 2 large rooms, but residents
no further. Now there will be transfers, two or three, .pp \ (there were a lot. My aunt Khaya managed to get married and together with
main in Minsk - the largest, largest city of Belarus, oiii with a shorn-hearted Yessei and Genya lived in the same room, Tanya, Samuel and
which I've heard a lot. Was I afraid? Not. I remember how I was on • 1, Ipt with my husband on another. I was unwanted by them, but they did not expel me either,
Belorussky railway station in Moscow I climb into a cab and, l n pdila. I have to go somewhere.
fastened with belt styling. The coachman is huge. Tied up I was from them the Bauman technical school was located.
with a bright sash, takes next to him my basket and carries me on I 11 learned, it is difficult to enter. But I started with him. Filed
address. I am not in the least afraid of anyone. The horse jogs, clinks, and passed the exams well, even good in mathematics.
clatter of hooves on stones, and here we stopped. We arrived, accepted, who then hung in the courtyard of the school, my
get off. pg turned out - there were 10 applications for one place, and
• It is close, B. Pirogovskaya, from the Belorussky railway station. Everything, IISCH.IpiMdpp ii first of all children of workers and peasants, and I was
arrived. A large, white, corner, manor house with some kind of tower, „i p, Ngrki dsdy, i.e. employee.
From the side of the alley, the front door with a bell. There he left me1'Iv19rotiil, I came home and found aunt Entu there
cab. I knock on the door. Shyly, then bolder and more. No one, ▶ no one. Oli was unhappy. Without her consent they sent
I leave the basket and turn the corner. Yes - baby salads were prod. The point is that E.M. in our family
The front garden and the children are running. A passer-by woman understands that she was bloody, She lived all the years alone, got used to strict
a provincial woman and says to me - they will steal your basket, it will lead you to a good life. In general, she realized that she owed me
Moscow. It is necessary to call, but not to knock. I'm running for the basket and already looking to get away from me. In the People's Commissariat for Education, she had
through the bars and looking through the eyes of adults. I scream. I was approached from ii, 'pggooali go to agricultural
a pretty middle-aged woman and I explain to her who and why they are small and most importantly they feed when they work. I AM
here. She shrugs her shoulders and regrets - Enta Moiseevna seimAUMMumon 's And 2-3 weeks went to work in the greenhouses and
lives in Leningrad, her room is locked. Probably, by the expressed MORAMI E times a day. In the morning and in the evening it was
She understood everything of my face - I have nowhere to go. The gate opened with tea, and in the afternoon a vegetable lunch, quite
she told me - don't be afraid, I won't leave you on the street, you will
live y me until your aunt arrives. She lived for a long time, no matter how long she was, that is, they did not accept it, but if 7
36
MRM will be accepted. While I was working and renting
37
exams, I got used to it and began to speak Russian better (I knew
Belarusian) and we, the candidates, moved to study in
a seed-growing technical school near Moscow at the Bitsa station, where
they took us without exams. We worked there and studied,
went to Moscow to visit - is there a place. Finally in January
for a month I was admitted to the Moscow Garden and Garden College
named after Timiryazev, and I became a real student. I went to see E.M.
behind the basket. I remember the steps I went down to her
escorted to the street. She told me - goodbye, - and I her
wanted to kiss, but she turned away. I never went there again
never.
There were 7 girls and 19 men in the group. Most of all was
men over 20, and even over 30 years. Were from the ShKM (peasant school
youth) from the villages of Orel, Ryazan and other Russian corners.
There were few urbanites. I studied well because prepared was
better than others. There were three of us Jews - me, Efim Bretner and Rita
Magidina. I made friends with Ksenisy Andreeva, and I want about her
and had breakfast there for free. Usually we are in the morning
worked, came to the classroom hungry, frozen, c
with wet feet, and when lessons began and we were warming up,
I was terribly sleepy. And then evening came, and we hunted -
where to go. Well if it was after receiving the scholarship
(we received 14 rubles, of which 8 rubles were given for food).
First of all, we bought for 1 ruble. - 100 "transparent" candies - tai
they were called on Mosselprom trays and sucked them endlessly.
One candy could be sucked all day.
We went to the cinema. The theater was worse, it was difficult without a ticket
was to get there. I remember a whole story - how we watched the premiere
"Lyubov Yarovaya" with participation, it seems, of Vera Pashennaya. In the pocket
iii seed. The girls went on foot. And here is Nikitsky Gate, Okhotny
rztsl and we are in Maly. The play begins and we tumble
lost tickets. They were, but lost on the road. They believed and we are on
+ Ilerks. We sit, watch and laugh. On the way back they rumbled
and
gkgludki, and we decided to get on the tram without a ticket. The car was
tell in more detail. She was a Chuvash. Her mother brought in years
hunger in the Volga region and left with her brother to sit on a bench on
Kazansky railway station. They were taken to an orphanage, where they
n chnyi, but the closer we got to Kudrinskaya, the people
I .i and it turned out less, and the conductor asked - girls, where are your
, pipggy? I don’t remember anything. Everyone jumped off on the move, and I fell on
were brought up. She never remembered her mother and brother, and she broke her jaw, i.e. dislocated her. Walked for a long time
maybe she didn't know about them. She was small, frail, but very iliiinq jaw.
smart, one might say - talented. Knew Yesenin by heart, Blok IzzChFN loved Vorovskogo Street. Through it we went to
others, and I was very jealous of her. She was heartfelt, and all my life, yes, yooooooot and spent hours there. Ksenia got into the habit of one
now I wonder why we have never met in life more? h, we go to the Public Library. You will put on all the best - there
We lived intensely, but cheerfully. Our hostel was vp! nd flutter, climb the stairs and see all of yourself in
a wooden 2-storey house on Kudrinskaya Square, and walked in a mirror. You sit at a table under a blue glass shade
early in the morning on foot to the technical school, which was located next to si he 'gepli, it is pleasant to read, read, and suddenly the call is already 12 hours
Trekhgornaya manufactory, past the windows of which we passed. ЧЧН, Пнблиотекп is closing. Even completely. flew by 4-5
We worked in greenhouses, greenhouses, in the field. Our legs have always been, Nipplems, we and Ksenia are cleaning women in the workers' school, which
raw, and we were always cold, because were poorly dressed. I dreamed about Voroshilov's wife, I think Ekaterina Ivanovna. Two on
black skirt, white cambric blouse and o sturdy boots, Lazy. Day I, day she. We wore an apron, red
There was no hunger. We always chewed something, sometimes rhubarb, sometimes cabbage, MrpA1nru ppgplovu, and swept, washed the floors. The students pestered
carrots, and the stomachs with pleasure digested everything. OM Mri gop was given out that they are also students. Went to the station
The botanical garden where we worked, we knew how our ogorid, orumpp ioiirs - lifted a sack of potatoes and carried them easily.
At one time we settled down to a dispensary, which was difficult and difficult. We dreamed of love, of material
manfacture.
 We took care of flowers, and for this we have already drunk
38
and you, by the way N once dreamed
Z9
 o chocolates -
I will work, y they will always be in my closet, and I will take them when
I want to.
Several pairs stood out - the most successful, a little
envied. They seemed to be happy, although not all
survived until the end of the technical school. In the 2nd year, I became friends with
Grishka Tukhmanov. We went to the movies together, even once
were visiting y his brother. Can't remember anything
romantic, it seems they have never kissed, but attracted to him
talk, take a walk. Fifth, Valka took it away. Valka life
energetic, funny and easy-going with guys - changed
several in 3-4 years, and in the last year she ended her life
Professor Edelstein12 came and in his speech told the following
parable o6 Ivane. “They dressed Ivan in a jacket and told him: When
button up the first button - climb a certain
height, fasten the second button - rise higher, then
even higher, and Ivan shouted - I understood, I understood everything, and began to button
and rise higher and higher, and when he reached the sky and stopped,
he didn't know how to get down to earth again. - Don't be Ivans,
live on the earth, hold on to the earth! "
In the spring of 1929 we were assigned to collectivization. Me
sent to the Pronsky district of the Ryazan region. Commune. Early
Yesia, the snow hasn't melted yet. I run an agricultural engineering school. For a long
suicide.inium men and women are sitting in fur coats, we go through the villages, we look
Ksenia was reserved and outwardly nondescript. Once she told me, ri 'burn. Forges are working, fixing equipment, getting ready. Canteen,
says - “Sashka Makarov (25 years old handsome man and sang) ii ,,, r sits free - thick oatmeal jelly, cabbage soup, sour cream was
I declared my love for you - let me take care of you, and I told him that, i, delicious. Together with me from the Timiryazev Academy there
she replied - that I can’t help you, that you will take care of me? ”You are a tall man, black, it seems by the name of Svinenko.
I must say that I was unhappy with my appearance in those days, by the evening he caught me, wanted to use force. But I c
youth. From early spring I was covered all over from the sun III, I hit him in the face and opened some kind of gate that
freckles and my nose all the time peeling, peeling off 10 skins, the sticky scared him away. Soon he disappeared - he was afraid.
exposed neck and arms also suffered from the sun. My thick, even I drove around the villages, it seems for conversations, with us there were musicians,
very thick, too thick curls fluttered in the wind and he concerts. For some reason, a lot of people were with failed
it seemed that I looked like a witch. I had to make a hat izlmp s ps understood the reasons, then they explained to me -
colored stocking and pull your curls into it. I was poorly dressed, like hereditary syphilis.
everything, although I could ask y relatives for a good dress, but ps, l, l and sit in a cart with a driver and two women, somewhere
I wanted to stand out. I was serious and at the same time laughing. 'I' Yurug - Tvtyapa, what nation are you? I am, I say, a Jewess. - Not
She could laugh - go in for almost no reason. Once, you are completely different from them. You are very good. And you
I was kicked out of class because I could not calm down - stop 'mm. iogdp? I asked him. No, he says - I heard they
laugh.
There was a military teacher for us in military affairs - a military man by the name of StoM bpl 11, as it was short, but I felt
Once, when we were standing at attention in the ranks, he said that if he wanted to finish his studies as soon as possible, to be with people,
hard trials and he needed 6y a faithful friend, he was 6y chosen „i, lI, 1111W, B 'come on, in the spring they sent me to the neighboring c
whom? Everyone was waiting and suddenly - Mostkov! I blushed and everyone watched iiiIL sh „arrange the early cabbage landing.
me. I “lie zhiish personal economy and were mostly
I wrote few letters home and did not miss home, did not survive II% of ironic houses, knew agricultural technology, but here they
so it seems to me. l, s • upppp n '1'OZy (partnerships for joint
Time flew by, we took part in the graduation parties of the 1st p rpiomy, We were sent to lead them.
senior students and waited for their
 queue. Once upon a time
40
41
I remember I came to the village early in the morning in the frost - on the site
nobody here. I went to the huts - and no one goes to land - they meet
me only old women, the young ones hid somewhere. I am a few days
I went to that village in a row. I remember the teahouse. Men at the tables
They drink tea from saucers with a small piece of sugar on the cheek. On the tables
a large porcelain teapot for each. All steamed. AND
we drank and the tea was really delicious and the sweetness was pleasant.
We were already considered almost agronomists and went to organized
garden farms to work. I remember the victory! Everyone was given
their rows of wilds, a bunch of cuttings cut from cultivars
apple trees, in hand, and wet the knitting in the belt. With what dignity I
looking at their neighbors - study friends, special
We went together to the consulate somewhere in the center. The fact is that
cipher card - i.e. the visa was also for me, and I said that I would not go, I must
I have to finish college. Mom did not mind, but the one who made out
documents, looked down at me and grinned - I don't remember that
he said, but something offensive to me - like a fool! One night
Mom spent the night in my dorm and I remember - she patched me
leaky coat.
We all went to Lenin's mausoleum - my mother looked into Lenin's face
it is courteous, and when she left, she said - “My daughter, I don’t want to go there,
11 0 there is no other way for me if I could work here even
a cleaner - just to earn bread for my children, I would not go,
would be with you. "
I used the budding knife to make a T-cut on the best part What could I do for her? I have another year to study in Moscow and
wild, cut off the eye correctly and, spreading the bark with a knife, the wild, u the country unemployment. Father and Abram are already there. Thoughts were about
I planted a hundred under the bark, squeezing my fingers, like then with a washcloth, I I I will finish college and go to Mexico - after all, they are coming to us from
tied a peephole on both sides. The norm was - 1000 pieces per shift.rui from their countries and ours are going, I can go through the Comintern even to
The ranks of each of us were recording shamelessly, and according to the survival rate of the eyes, we did a lot of work. And my mother agreed with me, and poor mother
our progress was assessed. My rows were good, I was waiting for me that I would come no more and no less
Shegsiim ambassador to Mexico. So they told me after 40 years of mine
I was an active Komsomol member. I read newspapers and magazines and wrote 1111 0 11.11
subscription for all courses of the technical school. The last school winter was N I 'ir'nl traveling by train, and then by steamer to Mexico. I am her
filled with a huge craving for Moscow cultural life. I went111 n "no, pi1, Only when the train started, and my mother and the guys
I went to all the performances at the Meyerhold Theater1E, to the Hermitage14, to exhibitions.
- led, led some kind of force, I seemed to say goodbye to everyone. and ni and itzkisis, and I sat down, and the train picked up speed and soon disappeared
On one of the spring days, they call me to the teacher's room, where the phone is -II, n1 w I sat down, wiped my face, wet with tears, with a handkerchief and
one for the entire technical school. I'm runing. Khaya calls - “Tanya, come to us. 11. .11i mi a Seo life.
Your mother came with children. She is going to her father in Mexico. " I even spent the last 11 summer vacation in Vitebsk with my aunt
scared, but immediately drove off. Mom was in Moscow only I. 11 ii I I'tsls was small. We lived in a dacha near the city.
several days, but I remember them and remembered all my life. 11 I and 1n Ivel surrounded me with attention and care, and I rested
My mum! She was then about 50 years old, but looked old, 1 and deserted.
exhausted, dark-skinned, and the children were thin, and Dorochka was a limp school year. We were quickly released
on the eve of departure, she fell and broke her leg. They were dressed for activization15 and the country needed personnel for the village, and
old overcoats. Mom in a coat made of an overcoat dyed in black r 11 minutes agronomists. We tried to feed ourselves
color, the boys are just in greatcoats, only stitched a little p1'K, We understood that we would leave and many of us would not
sutured. Preparing my mother for departure Bronya is my cousin and i'1 got a ticket to the Mayakovsky Komsomol evening in
Leningrad. She put them on so that she would not be ashamed.
cried with pity and shame - yes, yes, shame.
42
 in public. Yai '1st Komsomol house. I remember a poorly lit hall
yu, "the stage, and the big, big, long Mayakovsky.
43
The hall was noisy, but he reads and reads.
 We, of course, do not understand much, and
noisy. Shouts - “We do not understand you. It stops and
speaks loudly - What don't you understand? A cloud in pants? It is necessary to read
carefully and understand! - Why do you travel abroad? - Is he
is silent and raises his head in a lot and speak quietly - Because - And he,
rebellious, looking for a storm, as if there is peace in the storm ”! I'm going home and
for some reason it's hard on my soul.
After a short time, his cold body lay in the writers' house
on the street Vorovskogo, next to whom we lived, and we walked him
look. For a long time there were newspapers in my bedside table with his
dying poems. "Everything is over! The love boat crashed o
everyday life. Comrade government - provide for my mother. " Everyone went
conversations, and more unwanted.
more fueled the desire to do something big. I went.
She told everything about her father, about her mother and about herself. Me carefully
listened and said that I would receive an answer. Were the last
preparations for the state. exams, repeated the material. Call to
break. I walk down the stairs and I see on the bulletin board
some fresh printed piece of paper - an ad. I read and that's it
whirled - “To Moetkov T.I., as an alien element, exclude
gokhnikum. Free the hostel. "
The girls came to the hostel and found me on my bed all in
slack. All were silent. One Xenia said - “You will sleep with me, not
cry and don't give up. "
) Life went on as usual, everyone left early in the morning for classes, and I
bagsh1a in Moscow. Hungry. Went to MOZO, MONO, MO, MOMI 22.
We went to the Polytechnic to listen to poets. I walked a day, a week, a month - they promised to sort it out everywhere and everywhere
Zharov1b, Bezymensky17 and Joseph Utkin18 with Lunacharsky19. “Harmony, refusal. Everywhere I left my tears. I didn't go to college anymore.
accordion - a dear side, poetry of the Soviet countryside>. - Zharov. I went late, when everyone was asleep, and got up when everyone was already
“Oh, Sun, stop, oh please, can't you see that you
the fiery heart of Ilyich stopped "- Bezymenskhiy. Sounded in my K'go advised me to go to the reception to Mikhail Ivanovich
in his ears - Party card - “Only one small one, one ticket is lost, 1 ip 1 below23? There was such a reception, where they registered and could
a gaping gap at the heart of the party. Do you hear the party? " Utkin -i i. i trust M.I. It was a hot summer. I'm exhausted and that's it and
so gentle, I read o the hat, o my fur seal, o the patches thatute cried. I didn't go to my family, I was ashamed, Malke didn't
put it on trousers and a vest. No, go. Ksenia fed me - she brought something from the dining room and
Lunacharsky is also standing before my eyes - fast, 'I iI' 'JTS' Lsisg.
temperamental and spoke of young poets with love. About poetry, oh! Some tall uncle told me. He wrote - surname, name,
our future life, about the happiness of being young. I walked home from where I come from. He wrote, wrote and says - You are my countrywoman, not
on foot (there was not a dime), or rode in a crowded tram, aPi11ga. MU. will help you. Do not Cry. Go, go, and pushed me in
poems rustled in my head. The whole life is ahead and it must be lived like this, n'r'ilil'l. I's study, where a beard bent at the writing table.
so as not to be ashamed .... N '"' yes and Issmolo came in and stood at the table, bowing her head, he read everything,
We were assigned. There was a contract, i.e. recruiting to distant'4111 Ugi the scammer wrote, then looked at me and said - “You
the edges. They gave out money and assigned them to shops where we could * At mppopats, but I wanted to go to Mexico, you’ll have enough work here too - that's
buy some good clothes. Me and Nina Lapinari i * u "work in Birobidzhan. Everything will be fine. What, your
contracted, and I bought a woolen dress with some kind of red 1m. are you out? You already know everything well. On! ”, And thrust me
bowknot, a nina blue crepe de Chine dress. We were preparing for Miygiu, tls bngo is written: "Rosalia Samuilovna Zemlyachka24.
exams.рн1В. pssgpnew. M.I. Kalinin ".
Thoughts swarmed in my head. And what if you go to the district committee and go to the hot avenue, ran to Red Square,
Komsomol20 and ask for underground work in Mexico? I1Ion {g and inik About narrow streets the NKRKI was located. Found it. Behind
Congress of the Comintern, I read page after page, and a tall gray-haired woman was sitting in the party town.
44
45

long skirt. I asked her - where is Zemlyachka, and she answered
reached out and took a piece of paper from me. Tell me nothing
had to. She took up the telephone receiver and told me to sit down.
I sat down on the edge of a chair and still did not believe that my torment was over.
I remembered her conversation with the technical school. She told them - Give her
a certificate, like everyone else, if she has good grades, immediately,
and let me know. She looked into my face and said -Go to your
technical school, there you will have everything. I didn't even say goodbye, I was running
where I was cursed, where I hated everything.
Everything was quiet around. Summer. Holidays. They all left. I'm standing
It was warm in Craiso's room, and we warmed up, rubbed
frostbitten cheeks and fingers and waited for the arrival of employees and
bosses. Our travel certificate was from
People's Commissariat of Agriculture of the USSR. Divided lengthwise into 3 parts,
it certified that I, Mostkova T.I., was on a mission to
order of Khabarovsk Kraiso for permanent work
agronomist for vegetable growing. One part - the spine was left for me
i; dent, one was sewn to the case in the HR department and another was sent
'place of future work.

I {ac all three were sent to Birobidzhan district, but for now
y teacher's room door and I'm afraid to open it. Suddenly the door flew open, iii, they shoved the director of the state farm Finkelstein to Pokrovka, so that he
and our head teacher, with a happy smile, pulls me, and shakes my hand, and he accepted. Pokrovka station is the first station from Khabarovsk to
congratulates, and shoves me a certificate that I graduated in 1930 eaiid. A state farm was organized there, and his friend Efim c