condescending. I dragged paper, cardboard, boxes from the shop - everything, everything
for your club. He was dearer to me at home and ... my relatives, especially my father.
In his face, I saw our class enemy.
They helped a friend lie. Matzah was packed into large wicker
Ii q ipshi and covered with a white sheet. She was tempted to eat
i opica, but was prohibited. They put baskets in our maiden's, and
Mtikhoiho at night ... crunched. Mom made all sorts of matzo on Easter
Sieve bread, Y dad had a bad stomach and he was bought TOey - dumplings (kneydlah), jackdaws. I remember - seider, i.e. myself
sieve. Evening. He sits at the table in the hall and neatly cuts yk at the table. White tablecloth, red homemade in decanters
sieve crust. We, children, observe and then pounce on niipp. Each case (glass), a large glass with amber
them. Dad pours trifles on the table and counts - sorts the coin kisch sawing for HIM - God. All smart, cheerful, waiting.
Coin. 11, gi ipim, I3-year-old, asks kates (questions) - in a chant,
Mom on Thursday peels a lot of carrots for tsimes. Friday. IL, 'I sings too. Why - a story about how Jews
the Russian stove is heated and mom cooks for two days - tsimes, jellied meat, Hum i i ll poly, how they lived without bread and had to bake matzo,
cholne, gut - all this is put in a hot oven overnight and with appetite i, i.ii, .i was for HIM, so that he, along with all
eats on Saturday afternoon, Friday night. Celebration.
24
 Nothing
unraveling. On a chair beside my father under the pillow
25
there is a hidden matzah - a 13-year-old must find it. Will he find it? All
funny, but joyful and comfortable.
Spurred on, flushed, in a festive costume -
owner, father of a large family. Mom is always busy
anxious - today the queen, mistress, mother of a large family.
She divides the chicken for everyone so that it is not offensive. Each one
merit. Father - a strong shelf - he holds the family on his shoulders,
girls - wings - they will have to fly away, and she leaves herself
... nothing - ass. My good mother, I even forgot her face.
What else do I remember about Slutsk? I am a pioneer, then a pioneer
Komsomol member. Despite my non-proletarian origin, I
trust. I march in formation with a staff under my arm. We sing -
Curzon wanted fish, Curzon flew into the sea. Eh Pilsudski, eh
Pilsudski, eh. After the meetings, we enthusiastically sing the International8.
We go home in flocks, in boots in deep snow, in the old
coat. We do not go, but we run, and for a long time then we warm up the frozen
fingers and with great appetite and greed we eat delicious,
frozen potatoes, washed down with cucumber pickle. Arranged
May Day in the forest, away from people. With a sinking heart, I worry
I run from one contact to another, I repeat the password on the way, and on
the yard is already night, and we must not get lost and be in time for the fire in time.
A fire is burning, potatoes are being baked, which will be our dinner, and we
we sing in one voice - eh potatoes, gourmet, denier, denier, pioneers
ideal, al, al, he does not know pleasure, day, day, who does not
passed. Eh, you are a sweet potato, tooshka, tooshka ... Glory to our
Belarusian potatoes! What would we do without her? The most delicious
As Polino, we studied in the same class. She was very sweet.
Swarthy, with a little fluff on delicate skin, she was the youngest
in family. The elder Aug was already making a living from y strangers.
Sarochka is a fiery revolutionary, she was the instigator in the club
Presented and observed: honestly all the laws of our pioneers and then
Komsomol. She was principled in everything and jealously followed
our sometimes childish pranks, deviations from the norm,
"no, Sarah Rabinovich is coming." Boris, their brother, was the pride of the family,
and he was rarely at home. Somewhere in the town he had his fiancée Tsilya.
A house near the synagogue, across the river, a house on chicken legs. Rooms
tiny with small low windows looking into a large
walk-through yard. In the back room, father - almost always lay and
prayed. Mother was a small and inconspicuous, quiet woman.
I heard from my mother - I need to collect for them - this means that
there is no bread at home, nothing to live on, to feed. Then I no longer remember the house, but
an elongated room where they already lived without parents (dad died
with mom). I hung around with them, I remember they considered me a laughing,
they gazed lovingly but condescendingly. Anya has already worked somewhere,
r Iola and Sarah were still studying. Finally, I remember the master's apartment
Proletarskaya street. This apartment was confiscated y
the idea of ​​the rich from the revolution and given to Boris for use.
() Oetvnovka of the former owners is saved, Boris is driving somewhere, Tsilya
'h4e did not move, and Polina and I are running around the rooms, walking
AFCHFrami on Proletarskaya back and forth with everyone, like real ones
flq and run to the club, to our dear and beloved club, to whom we
s $ i0M all the warmth of their hearts.
I remember the dishes - both baked, and potatoes, teihouses, and did we bother? Yes! I remember the school - Jewish and real.
fried onions, and with brine, it was incomparable. Y my 'nn ip. mathematics - Broyde. Rusk, a gloomy man of about 45.
Lyova's brother had a good appetite, and he was able to eat the whole II and III grade quickly and starts. The class is dead quiet. I AM
cast iron potatoes with an enamel half-liter mug of brine, a,.,. Sia M that thought and lost the thread of explanation. I AM
his belly was big - we slapped him on the belly and called him I 'HIllIlK'), and, finally, joy - I understood the theorem. Teacher
"Potato". And its edges were easy to count and all were thin -t and ng (there i back and repeat the theorem or problem many times.
only one blue eyes looked at the roll. Neighbor, with children 11 0 9 iodiate heads and are silent, and he, as in hypnosis, repeats and
whom I played, said - "here is Tanechka, a golden girl, a whole piaIyp1F ?, (and (kopits stops. I love mathematics. They wrote
plays for a day and doesn't even ask for food. "We are MI mti (klkh, boom ° and it wasn't good, - when Malka brought me
My happy pioneer years, when I was accepted on equal terms ^ 1.111 and a few common notebooks, I gave one of them to algebra and
into a large working family, were associated with the Rabinovich family. ('
26
27
according to Shaposhnikov's book - Maltseva solved everything, from the beginning to
end.
Now I am 65 years old, and with my grandson Igor I easily solve the same
equations - remembered for a lifetime.
I had abilities, but I studied average. Wrote well
essays and everything, however, on the topic - the revolution and Lenin. They to me
were given. I remember the history of history9, they paid a lot of attention to it. My brother
Abram, 2 years older than me, could not learn it in any way and here is my mother
made me teach diamat with him10. I remember - the number goes
in quality, etc.
Before my eyes - the evening of January 22, 1924. The whole family is in full
collection. We had dinner. lit the lamp. It's still noisy and the guys are running
around the table and play hide and seek. Aunt Manka came and told
all the latest news. Lenin is dead! Everyone was on guard
the kids fell silent. What will happen? Who will replace him? How life will go
farther? I ran to the club. It was mourning and we gathered in small groups and
preparing for the collection. Mogilevsky's mourning speech - study, oath
Leninists and tears.

The last thing I remember about my mother's house is my father's departure. we
we are all sitting on a cart, dad, mom and we are 5 children. Dorochka 4-5
years old. I'm already a young lady, I'm a little ashamed to go in a cart, but I understand
that we need to be with mom, with children and we go far to the station, throughout
Proletarskaya street, past our club. Daddy's still going
several men. They go from Russia to Mexico, a mother and we
stay. Dad is leaving not from a good life and not because of political
beliefs, although he does not like the Bolsheviks and calls them shantrapa.
There is really nothing to live with, nowhere to work, unemployment is terrible, yes
and dad does not know any craft, and besides, he is drawn to America,
On the eve of my departure, my mother was combing her hair in the mirror, and I went over and stood
beside. I remember - she ran her hand through my curly hair,
and said - my daughter, let you live better than me. " Train
left and took our dad away. Next year we went to Mexico again
several families, and dad ordered Abram to be sent with them that mom and
did. He did not want to study, there was nowhere to work, and dad lived there
one and we need to help him make money.
4
Our family before dad's departure, 1925
I i OM time I had to go live with my grandfather and I
or visit my mom. Grandfather sent her a little flour, then
where he came from as a young guy in order to get married and here
I'H mpi1 or money, and she herself sewed on strangers - by a master
now, burdened with a family, unsettled, he hopes to find there
Ipotsp "since she was and did not earn much. The children grew up, and together with
your happiness. They are not allowed there and you can go to Mexico, which
NIMI N rieho) rd.
next to him and here it is - he goes there, and then he earns money and takes
MY last year of life in Slutsk, in the city where I was born and
wife and children. He dreamed that he would live frugally, that my parents would be welcome, or maybe the grandparents were
save in everything, will hang the sausage to look at it, a
NCHmnp'pi. I wrote that I was getting ready to enter the big life,
he will eat bread with water, as he told us everyone is doing,
# 10 pshi M n.rn and up to yourself. It is necessary to gnaw the granite of science, respect
who want to go public. The mother cries quietly, but in fact, the children and children must join the Komsomol
in fact, the situation is hopeless. Rides not one fell and it calms.
28
29
- deserve it. One winter morning a bitter mouth came into the house. Son
grandfathers, beloved and unique, handsome and talented,
employee - inspector of the Belarusian People's Commissariat for Education in Minsk -
committed suicide - hung himself on a towel in his
little room. It was difficult to look for reasons, but grandfather did not grieve
borders. He cut all his clothes, sent his gray-haired
head, sat on the floor and cried. My mom and Aunt Malka got sick. His
Genya's wife and daughter lived in Moscow. Malka graduated from the Academy.
Krupskaya in Moscow and was appointed inspector of the Narobraz in
Bobruisk. Her fiance cheated on her - he married her friend. To that
time, Faivel Harak appeared, which Malka loved very much, was
a good, calm person, but could not extinguish the fire of suffering
in Malka's soul. Faivel settled in his grandfather's apartment to
stay when I leave to study in Moscow. So, in the last months we
the three of us lived and I had more time to study. Mom to me
made a pair of cotton dresses and one combined woolen dress.
Everything else was old, but patched, clean and quite
decent for a trip to Moscow. Grandpa saved money for me 25
rubles, it was enough for a ticket and food
as it says, carried it. B first winter holidays, and they y me
were very short, I did not go home to my mother, but ... to some
a place near Minsk. Dveira Ostrovskaya lived there, HIS senior
sister who also graduated from the Minsk Jewish Pedagogical College and
she worked there as a teacher. Why did I go there? I remember c
bitterness. HE did not write a single letter to me and I, of course, from
pride too, and I did not know his address and his fate. Someone to me
wrote that Dweira is already working, and I went to find something o
learn it. It seems to me that I did not even ask about him and in general
there was no question of him. Maybe I drove home, it was close there,
it was erased from my memory.
1
for about a month, and then we'll see. The summer was warm and
my soul was happy.
I'm going to Moscow. How many have already heard about Moscow, and I am there
I will live as long as y Aunt Yanta, and then I will do, y I will,
of course a hostel. Study, study and study - Lenin's words we
knew by heart. And HE is next to me. I have no time during the day, but in the evening
we walk up to the roosters. In the cemetery, which is close to our house.
He kisses me, swears that he always loves and forever, that we
will definitely meet. He goes to study in Odessa at the theater
He quits the studio - a pedagogical college, I leave for Moscow, 1926.
The last whistle. My big wicker basket, where is mom
put my feather bed down (how can I sleep without a feather bed) immerse me in my bed and tell the story of my first, bitter love, I'll finish -
compartment in my place, everyone comes out, waving, mom cries, we say goodbye, Mri detti h aktg that their mom was once young and
our eyes meet and I'm driving. I feel the pocket on my chest with my hand, Mm it was accidentally worn out after 9 years. I gave birth to Nusenka y
where my mother sewed my capital and attached a ticket so that she would go to 1itebsk and on the eve of May 1, 1935
lost. I'm going to Moscow.r 1gird0idzhan to my husband, who was waiting for me with joy c
More I am in my native and in childhood my beloved city of Slutsk in the city with a friend from Slutsk - Mnukha and suddenly
never returned. I didn't have to. Life picked me up and
thirty
• tour of the Odessa Jewish Drama Theater.
31
The actors of the theater and his name are participating. I say let's go see
and we will see it. I came home, I talk and laugh - I will see mine
first love. Faivel, Malka's husband, went to the theater with us. The first
we calmly watched the action, but it was nowhere and in no one
learned. I say - let's go and look for him, it's interesting after all. I do not
dared, and Mnukha went backstage and returned with him. My feet
gave way, speech ceased, I stood and stupidly looked at my feet, and he
said something to me, and I was glad to call - went to their places,
I feel a warm breath behind my back and his hand in the darkness lay on
my shoulder. I sat quietly, but I saw nothing or heard from
happening on the stage. When the second act ended, he took me
by the hand and led. A pregnant woman was sitting on a chair - I have no face
I saw it because did not look at her. He pushed me to her and said -
Tanya, this is my Tanya, about whom I told you a lot. What are we
I don’t remember, but I had a terrible feeling, I
cursed for everything. Fool, fool! We walked home and laughed, more
I was all over myself, but they came and told Malka laughing, laughing. She and
says - well, you, go quickly to your Joseph, or else
Malku. A few words about him. He was an old bachelor. He got married
late for the also middle-aged Pastron - Samuel's cousin and
Chai Pastron, i.e. Gena's aunt. A couple of legends were told about them.
When Slutsk was occupied by the Germans, and all the Jews were
destroyed, he continued to work in the same pharmacy - to the Germans he was
needed as a specialist and he was not touched. When he felt or,
maybe they suggested that an action was being prepared for him, he was at lunch
gave all his household and himself, including poison and the whole family - old
aunt Yakhna, wife, three children, and he himself were poisoned and thus did not
gave themselves to the destruction of the Germans. Another daughter of aunt Yakhna (I
never knew) married a Russian (which was considered terrible
sin) and left with him to Penza, where Malka with her husband and children
I met her at the beginning of the war, in the evacuation. Enta Moiseevna -
my mom and Malka's cousin. She was born and raised in
$ obruisk, and I met her in Moscow, and
After, when we lived in Velikiye Luki, and Klara went to Leningrad
study.
Grandma Song died of kidney disease when I was 6-7 years old.
do something stupid. It was May 3rd — we left in the evening, I think she was sick in bed in the spring. She probably was ill for a long time, because
to be in Moscow in the morning. There were many things to do, Nysenka was fighting and going out into the street. She called me over and asked - the river is already
month. Not a boy, but a doll. Round, naked, smiling and everyone
favorite. He showed up early in the morning. I was in a robe and getting ready
bathe, wash and pack. The whole family greeted him cheerfully, and
I said calmly (everything passed) that I was in trouble all day and
in vain he came so early. "I will help you in everything - I will
study "- all day spun around us, and in the evening together with everyone
Lazy, did the water go? I gladly answered her that yes, it is already spring.
, I'll die soon - she replied. I don't remember her funeral. It
come from a wealthy but impoverished family Pole - (by
Mind), and therefore she was married to a good woman from the
(ato was considered privileged) a young man -
TyachiE (place of the Island) means not urban and poor. I AM
led to the station, and we shook the steering wheels in a comradely manner. That oka was happy with him, tk. my grandfather was
Since I am finishing my "story" of life in Slutsk, I want a young, delicate, very self-possessed and intelligent person. A
my children knew a little about our relatives. Aunt Malka - to my mother's I Tall, slender, dark-skinned, bony. Love y us c
everyone knows our younger sister. She replaced my own mother for me, and she is in Eaimaya. He called me "daughter" and never loudly
I'll write more about her. My grandfather went to live with her in Vitebsk, and I have another 00 by Me. They had 11 children, but only four grew up.
I saw him once and was with him in 1932, when I first arrived OUIIRO YEARS We were dying early due to various diseases. Mom to me
with dad (Joseph) from Birobidzhan. rrsskzvzal on the fate of her younger brother. He ran away from home
My grandfather's sister, aunt Yakhna, lived in Slutsk when I was my age. He served in the navy and never returned home.
son Chaim - Yudl. Aunt Yakhna was an energetic woman emi $ tsp'i (Mikhail), I already wrote.
kept a grain shop and managed. Her son Haim Yudl was in love with some simple guy and it was not
pharmacist and served in the Gipchin pharmacy. Large - similar to M "husband, uv pogo ps gave out. She stayed up, as they say, in
32
33
I
girls. And here came from America a handsome man with a mustache, curly,
redhead, and she was married. She told me that she wanted love, and she
hoped that she would, and the father was from a different test. Person,
of course, honest, decent, but did not understand my mother's romance,
although he was faithful to her all his life. My father is small-town, his father is Leo
died early, leaving mother and children alone, and all the elders departed for
America and Poland.
My father lived in Slutsk with his family (he returned from Mississippi
about 1905-8), his sister Lubke - mother of Bronya and Grisha from
Leningrad, and in the dacha Urechye near Slutsk, another sister Etl - mother
Musi and Ani Reznik. Khaya's old grandmother lived for several years.
us, and I remember her trunk with balls of multicolored threads - she
1. Abram was born in April 1909.
2. Taiba in June 1911
3. Leib in August 1914
4.Mixl in November 1917.
5. Dweira in August 1921 of the famine year.
Abram finished 7 classes in Slushka, and did not study in Mexico,
helped dad. Married for the 1st time and had 2 children Nohem and Pesya, 2nd
times - 3 children.
A label in Mexico graduated from high school, married a Mexican Chelo and
n chalk 6 children - Lucy, Shifra, Pesya, Moses, Lazarus, Ida.
Mikhail had a son, Albert (died at the age of 13 from Botkin's disease) and
daughter Sylvia, born in 1956.
always knitted. I don’t remember when she left us, or maybe My grandfather on the father’s side Mostkov Leiba, Khaya’s grandmother.
be dead. I do not remember. We loved Aunt Etl from Urechye very much. For the father's brothers and sisters, their children and grandchildren live in the United States.
it was a joy for us children to go to Urechye in the summer. Uncle Samuil Reznik Grandfather from mother's side Borukhovich Nakhman, grandmother Pesya.
was an employee on the railway. Urechye station - he was in charge of fuel, lived in the side of my mother, I knew and loved her younger sister Mayaka for many years
a state-owned large wooden house. There was a tank in the yard c1gorukhovich, she married Faivel Harakh, they had children -
керосином и было очень приятно и прохладно во время летней жарымпп двоюродные брат и сестра Миша и Поля (Песя). Сейчас вся их
там лежать. Отправляла нас тетя c гамаком в лес и давала c собойR N, дети и внуки живут в США и Израиле.
мешок c провизией. Очень хорошо помню сыр (гомилка) -Мод мама Шифра Нахмановна Борухович, родилась в Слуцке в
высушенный, как кость, творог. Мы его грызли. Была сдоба, фрукты1 мии году, умерла в Мексике в августе 1962 года
Говор y нее был особый - клокочущий, звонкий и очень приятныйМи' Лапа Исрол Лейбович Мостков (Mostkoff) родился в 1880
Дядя Самуил был добряк и любил с нами шутить.II гу М иgоточке Остров, умер в Мексике в 1956г.
Помню! Утро. Все уже на ногах, a мы дрыхнем, гуляли допоздна.I Iонрононы в Мехико на еврейском кладбище.
Ах, эти белорусские летние, пахучие ночи! Разве в 12-13 лет можно
рано ложиться спать? Я накрылась одеялом и борюсь c дремотой
Дядя стоит лицом к стене в талесе и ремнях и молится, напевая...,
своими пальцами щекочет мне пятки, a я давлюсь от смеха. a lion
Резник уже влюблялся в девочек, a Ханеле еще сосала губу, и мы e
дразнили, не хотели брать c собой в лес. Трава высокая, высок